
Transcriber's Note:

    Original spellings have been retained. Minor typographical errors
    have been corrected without note. Bold type is shown between
    +signs+. Superscript letters are preceded by ^.




BELL'S SCOTTISH HISTORY SOURCE BOOKS

_General Editors_: S. E. WINBOLT, M.A., and KENNETH BELL, M.A.




THE JACOBITE REBELLIONS




BELL'S SCOTTISH HISTORY SOURCE BOOKS.

+1637-1688. The Scottish Covenanters.+ Edited by J. PRINGLE THOMSON,
M.A.

+1689-1746. The Jacobite Rebellions.+ Edited by J. PRINGLE THOMSON, M.A.


BELL'S ENGLISH HISTORY SOURCE BOOKS.

_Volumes now Ready, 1s. net each._

+449-1066. The Welding of the Race.+ Edited by the Rev. JOHN WALLIS,
M.A.

+1066-1154. The Normans in England.+ Edited by A. E. BLAND, B.A.

+1154-1216. The Angevins and the Charter.+ Edited by S. M. TOYNE, M.A.

+1216-1307. The Growth of Parliament, and the War with Scotland.+ Edited
by W. D. ROBIESON, M.A.

+1307-1399. War and Misrule.+ Edited by A. A. LOCKE.

+1399-1485. York and Lancaster.+ Edited by W. GARMON JONES, M.A.

+1485-1547. The Reformation and the Renaissance.+ Edited by F. W.
BEWSHER, B.A.

+1547-1603. The Age of Elizabeth.+ Edited by ARUNDELL ESDAILE, M.A.

+1603-1660. Puritanism and Liberty.+ Edited by KENNETH BELL, M.A.

+1660-1714. A Constitution in Making.+ Edited by G. B. PERRETT, M.A.

+1714-1760. Walpole and Chatham.+ Edited by K. A. ESDAILE.

+1760-1801. American Independence and the French Revolution.+ Edited by
S. E. WINBOLT, M.A.

+1801-1815. England and Napoleon.+ Edited by S. E. WINBOLT, M.A.

+1815-1837. Peace and Reform.+ Edited by A. C. W. EDWARDS, M.A.,
Christ's Hospital.

+1837-1856. Commercial Politics.+ By R. H. GRETTON.

+1856-1876. Palmerston to Disraeli.+ Edited by EWING HARDING, B.A.

+1876-1887. Imperialism and Mr. Gladstone.+ Edited by R. H. GRETTON,
M.A.

       *       *       *       *       *

+1583-1913. Canada.+ Edited by JAMES MUNRO, Lecturer at Edinburgh
University.

       *       *       *       *       *

+A Source-Book of London History.+ By P. MEADOWS, M.A. 1s. 6d. net.

       *       *       *       *       *

LONDON: G. BELL AND SONS, LTD.




                               THE

                       JACOBITE REBELLIONS

                           (1689-1746)



                                BY

                     J. PRINGLE THOMSON, M.A.

                            AUTHOR OF
 "ALEXANDER HENDERSON, THE COVENANTER," "THE SCOTTISH COVENANTERS"



                          [Illustration]



                              LONDON
                      G. BELL AND SONS, LTD.
                               1914




EDITOR'S NOTE


Within the compass of 120 pages it was impossible for me to cover every
event in this period. The "Forty-Five" itself would have provided enough
material to fill a volume of double the size. I have therefore
concentrated on the four events which seemed to me most
important--namely, the Darien scheme, the Union of the Crowns, and the
risings of 1715 and 1745. For the rest, I have endeavoured to
illustrate, however briefly, the religious, social, and industrial
activities of the time. As in my previous volume, I have drawn freely on
the invaluable publications of the Scottish Historical Society, and my
thanks are also due to Mr. William Cowan for permission to print the
extract which appears on p. 29.

                                        J. P. T.
 GLASGOW,
    _May, 1914_.




TABLE OF CONTENTS


 DATE                                                                  PAGE
 1689. STATE OF PARTIES IN SCOTLAND       _Dalrymple's "Memoirs"_         1
       THE CONVENTION OF ESTATES          _Dalrymple's "Memoirs"_         3
       DUNDEE'S REBELLION                 _Mackay's "Memoirs"_            6
       THE BATTLE OF KILLIECRANKIE        _Mackay's "Memoirs"_            8
 1690. THE RELIGIOUS SETTLEMENT           _"Melville Papers"_            11
 1692. THE MASSACRE OF GLENCOE            _"Papers Illustrative of the
                                              Highlands of Scotland"_    13
 1695. THE BANK OF SCOTLAND               _"Acts of the Parliaments of
                                              Scotland"_                 18

       THE DARIEN SCHEME:
       A. THE PROJECT AND ITS ORIGINATOR  _Burnet's "History of His
                                              Own Times"_                20
 1698. B. CONSTITUTION OF THE COMPANY     _"The Darien Papers"_          22
       C. WHY THE COLONY FAILED           _Burnet's "History of His
                                              Own Times"_                24
 1699. D. INDIGNATION IN SCOTLAND         _Burnet's "History of His
                                              Own Times"_                25

 1703. THE UNION IMPENDING                _Sir John Clerk's "Memoirs"_   27

       UNION OF THE CROWNS:
       A. THE LAST SCOTTISH PARLIAMENT    _"A Journey to Edenborough"_   29
 1706. B. DRAFTING THE TREATY             _Sir John Clerk's "Memoirs"_   32
       C. POPULAR HOSTILITY TO THE UNION  _Defoe's "History of the
                                              Union"_                    35
 1707. D. "AN END OF AN OLD SONG"         _"The Lockhart Papers"_        37

 1714. "THE WEE, WEE GERMAN LAIRDIE"      _Mackay's "Jacobite Songs"_    38

       THE RISING OF 1715:
 1715. A. GATHERING OF THE CLANS          _Rae's "History"_              39
       B. DEFENCE OF EDINBURGH            _Sir John Clerk's "Memoirs"_   43
       C. THE BATTLE OF SHERIFFMUIR       _Keith's "Memoir"_             45
       D. THE OLD PRETENDER               _Sinclair's "Memoirs"_         48
 1716. E. COLLAPSE OF THE REBELLION       _Rae's "History"_              50
       F. HARSHNESS OF THE GOVERNMENT     _"Culloden Papers"_            54

 1718. THE SCOTTISH CAPITAL               _Macky's "Journey through
                                              Scotland"_                 56
 1719. THE JACOBITE ATTEMPT OF 1719       _Keith's "Memoir"_             60
 1725. ENGLAND AND SCOTLAND CONTRASTED    _Macky's "Journey through
                                              Scotland"_                 65
       THE MALT TAX                       _"The Lockhart Papers"_        67
 1726. GENERAL WADE'S ROADS               _Burt's "Letters"_             70
 1735. SCOTTISH GARDENING                 _Cockburn's "Letters to His
                                              Gardener"_                 74
 1736. THE PORTEOUS RIOTS                 _Carlyle's "Autobiography"_    77
 1742. THE "CAMBUSLANG WARK"              _"Statistical Account of
                                              Scotland"_                 81

       THE "FORTY-FIVE":
 1745. A. PRINCE CHARLES LANDS IN
           SCOTLAND                       _"Culloden Papers"_            83
       B. RAISING THE PRINCE'S STANDARD   _Murray's "Memorials"_         85
       C. THE CAPTURE OF EDINBURGH        _Home's "History"_             86
       D. PRINCE CHARLES AT HOLYROOD      _Home's "History"_             89
       E. THE BATTLE OF PRESTONPANS       _Murray's "Memorials"_         91
       F. "JOHNNIE COPE"                  _Mackay's "Jacobite Songs"_    95
       G. INVASION OF ENGLAND             _Blaikie's "Itinerary"_        97
 1746. H. THE BATTLE OF FALKIRK           _"Lockhart Papers"_            99
       I. RETREAT TO THE NORTH            _"The Lyon in Mourning"_      102
       J. THE EVE OF CULLODEN             _"Memoirs of Strange and
                                              Lumisden"_                104
       K. THE BATTLE                      _"Memoirs of Strange and
                                              Lumisden"_                107
       L. THE PRINCE A FUGITIVE           _"The Lyon in Mourning"_      111
       M. FLORA MACDONALD                 _"The Lyon in Mourning"_      113
       N. CHARLES AT CLUNY'S "CAGE"       _Home's "History"_            117




THE JACOBITE REBELLIONS

(1689-1746)




STATE OF PARTIES IN SCOTLAND (1689).

    +Source.+--_Memoirs of Great Britain and Ireland, from the
    Dissolution of the Last Parliament of Charles II. until the
    Sea-Battle off La Hogue_, vol. i., p. 215, by Sir John Dalrymple,
    Bart. (London and Edinburgh: 1771.)


Of those who had offered their services to William for the settlement of
Scotland, three were eminent above the rest: the Duke of Hamilton, the
Marquis of Athole, and Lord Stair. The Duke of Hamilton had disapproved
of the measures of the late reign, but without publicly opposing them.
He had observed the same cautious conduct with regard to the parties of
his countrymen. He took advantage of his rank to attend none of those
public cabals in which all party-measures had been conducted in
Scotland, from the time of the tables of the covenant; and, by that
singularity, appeared to be of no party, at the same time when he was
dealing in private with all parties. Son of the illustrious house of
Douglas, married to the heiress of the house of Hamilton, related to the
royal family, and to most of the crowned heads of Europe, in succession
in right of his wife to the crown of Scotland, at a time when the
ancient families of Scotland were of importance in the scale of
government, because they were of importance in their own country, his
pre-eminence was seen by William, and perhaps feared. He had been
entrusted with none of the secrets of the revolution from the ambiguity
of his conduct. Yet he took a violent side against King James upon his
first retreat, but made apologies to that Prince's friends, so soon as
he heard of his return. William, therefore, affected to show him the
highest honours, cajolling him by those arts which the Duke was in use
to employ upon others. From hence, and from the vanity of pre-eminence,
he had consented to preside in the Assembly at London, which offered the
Prince the administration of government. And hence, William gave him all
the influence of the court, to be president of that convention which was
to make the offer of government itself.

The Marquis of Athole was a subject of great consequence, because his
estate and power lay in the heart of the highlands. He had concurred in
all the measures of the two royal brothers, and had been loaded with
favours and honours by both. Yet, upon news of James's retreat, he flew,
from restlessness of temper more than from principle, to London, while
Scotland was yet in disquiet; resolved, amid contending Princes, to make
the best terms for himself. He almost alone, of all those who went to
London to offer their service to the Prince of Orange, returned home
discontented; because his views had been too sanguine, and because he
was ashamed of what he had done. His repentance he made offer of to the
friends of James in Scotland, which was received, and thanked in public,
but in secret distrusted.

Lord Stair had none of the external advantages of the other two. Yet,
from great reach of thought, and through knowledge of men and parties
gained from experience, he came to be a considerable figure in party....
Upon the restoration he attached himself to the Duke of Lauderdale. The
furies of that minister he often moderated, and often opposed, openly
when he could, secretly when he could not; yet still preserved his
friendship. After enduring many years the loss of his rank and his
country, from the injustice of the Duke of York, he, at the age of
seventy, assumed again his long-neglected sword and cuirass, and came
over with the Prince of Orange, who was so fond of him that he carried
him in his own ship. The influence of Lord Stair in party was increased
by that of his son Sir John Dalrymple, a man distinguished above all by
the beauty of his person, and the power of his eloquence. To the wisdom
and experience of the father, to the parts and show of the son, rather
than to the power of the Duke of Hamilton, William, certain that the two
former could never hope to be pardoned by James, resolved to leave the
management of Scotland in the end; but, in the meantime, to make
advantage of the Duke's offers of service for the settlement of that
country.

Of all those nobles whom James, when Duke of York, had honoured with his
friendship, and when King, graced with his favours, a few only continued
openly in his interest. Of these the chief were the Duke of Gordon, a
Roman Catholic, to whom James had entrusted the castle of Edinburgh, a
man weak, and wavering in courage, but bound by shame and religion; Lord
Balcarres attached by affection, gratitude, and that delicacy of
sentiment which the love of letters commonly inspires; and Lord Dundee,
who had for ever before his eyes ideas of glory, the duty of a soldier,
and the example of the great Montrose, from whose family he was
descended. James had entrusted the care of his civil concerns in
Scotland to Balcarres, and of his military ones to Dundee. William asked
both to enter into his service. Dundee refused without ceremony.
Balcarres confessed the trust which had been put in him, and asked the
King, if, after that, he could enter into the service of another?
William generously answered, "I cannot say that you can." But added,
"Take care that you fall not within the law; for otherwise I shall be
forced against my will to let the law overtake you." The other nobles of
the late King's party waited for events, in hopes and in fears from the
old government and the new, intriguing with both, and depended upon by
neither.




THE CONVENTION OF ESTATES (1689).

    +Source.+--_Memoirs of Great Britain and Ireland, from the
    Dissolution of the Last Parliament of Charles II. until the
    Sea-Battle off La Hogue_, vol. i., p. 218, by Sir John Dalrymple,
    Bart. (London and Edinburgh: 1771.)


The convention met on the 14th of March. As the governing part of the
boroughs had been modelled by King James, the members sent up from
thence should have been favourable to his interests. But Lord Stair,
whose views were extensive, had taken care, in the paper which contained
the offer of administration to the Prince, to recommend that the
borough-elections should be made by a general poll of the burgesses; an
artifice which, while it took the blame of innovation off the Prince,
prepared the way for securing the elections to the whigs and
presbyterians. The parties at the convention first tried their strengths
in the choice of a president. The Duke of Hamilton was set up by the
new, the Marquis of Athole by the old court: a singular situation, where
both candidates were distrusted, both by those who recommended, and by
those who elected them. The former was preferred by 40 votes out of
about 150 voters: a victory which, from the nature of the human mind,
determined the wavering. A committee of elections was next named,
consisting of nine whigs and three tories. Sir John Dalrymple, who was
an able lawyer, found it easy to start objections to the returns of the
opposite party, and to remove those which were made against his own. The
committee in the house followed his opinions, because the necessity of
the times was made the excuse of partiality....

When the convention sat down, two letters were presented, one from the
present, and another from the late King of England. The convention read
both; but first passed an act, that nothing contained in the last of
them should dissolve their assembly, or stop their proceeding to the
settlement of the nation. James's letter was written in the terms of a
conqueror and a priest; threatening the convention with punishment in
this world, and damnation in the next. And, as it was counter-signed by
Lord Melfort, a papist, and a minister abhorred by the presbyterians,
the style and the signature hurt equally the interest which the letter
was intended to serve. No answer was given. William's letter, on the
contrary, was answered in strains of gratitude and respect; a
distinction which sufficiently showed what might be expected with regard
to the future resolutions of the assembly....

The revolution in England was brought about by a coalition of whigs and
tories; but, in Scotland, by the whigs almost alone. Hence, the Scottish
convention, instead of amusing themselves with school disputes about
words, which, while they discovered the fine lines of party in England,
had embarrassed the English convention, struck their blow without
ceremony, and came to a resolution, that King James had, by his evil
deeds, _forfaulted_ his right to the crown; a term which, in the
language of the law of Scotland, involved in it the exclusion of all his
posterity as well as his own. But, as this resolution would have
comprehended the other children of James, as well as the young Prince,
they agreed upon the following explanation of the word _forfaulted_.
"Agreed, that the word _forfault_, in the resolution, should imply no
other alteration in the succession to the crown than the seclusion of
King James, the pretended Prince of Wales, and the children that shall
be procreated of either of their bodies." Only five opposed these
resolutions....

The convention next made offer of the crown to William and Mary: a vote
in which the Duke of Queensberry and the Marquis of Athole concurred,
although they had refused to be present at the other. They reconciled
their conduct by saying, "That, since the throne was declared vacant by
the nation, they knew none so worthy to fill it as the Prince and
Princess of Orange"--a mixture of sentiment, intended to please both
Kings, but which, like most compliments of the kind, pleased neither.
From an excess of zeal which betrayed the cause of it, the Duke of
Hamilton demeaned himself to act the part of a clerk; reading, at the
ordinary place of proclamation, the act of convention aloud to the mean
multitude, who found even their own vanity hurt in the sacrifice which
was made to it by the first man in the nation. With more dignity the
parliament accompanied the offer of the crown with such a declaration of
rights as laid open all the invasions upon the constitution, not of the
late King alone, but of his brother, and ascertained every disputed
pretension between the crown and the subject; for, accustomed either to
trample upon their sovereigns, or to be trampled upon by them, the
Scottish nation chose to leave nothing to be adjusted afterwards by the
vibration between the executive and legislative powers, which had kept
the English constitution almost continually in a just medium between the
imperiousness of the crown and the licentiousness of the subject. The
Earl of Argyle for the peers, Sir James Montgomery for the knights, and
Sir John Dalrymple for the boroughs, were sent to London with the offer
of the crown....

The administration of the coronation-oath of Scotland was a ceremony
attended with much awe; the King holding up his right hand high, whilst
he swore, and repeated each word with slowness after the person who read
it. It contained a clause, that the King should root out heretics. At
these words, William stopt the Earl of Argyle, who was administering the
oath, and declared, he did not mean to oblige himself to become a
persecutor. The commissioners answering, that such was not the meaning
of the oath: "Then," said the King, "I take it in that sense only."
Whether this scruple was the effect of affectation or of delicacy, is
immaterial: it became a King, and it pleased the people.




DUNDEE'S REBELLION (1689).

    +Source.+--_Memoirs of the War carried on in Scotland and Ireland,
    1689-1691_, by Major-General Hugh Mackay, Commander-in-Chief of His
    Majesty's forces. _With an appendix of original papers_, p. 225.
    (Edinburgh: Bannatyne Club, 1833.)


THE DUKE OF HAMILTON TO LORD MELVILL.

                                           _Holyroodhous, 8 June, 1689._

Yesternight I received your lordship's of the 4th instant, with one to
General Major Mackay; I did the same night send one to the west to
dispatch some to Ireland for intelligence, and write two several ways to
the captains of our ships to go to the coast of Ireland to cruise there,
and give the best account they could if there was any appearance of an
invasion from thence, which, I am confident, there is little fears of,
if it be not by the French fleet, and it's very strange if they can be
able to come to our coasts and land men, if there be an English and
Dutch fleet at sea as you write, but if they should be able to land any
considerable force we should be in an ill condition, considering how
disaffected all the north is, and if we should absolutely with all his
forces recall Mackay before he dissipates or beats Dundee, all that
country generally, lowlands as well as highlands, would be in arms with
him; so, upon communicating your letter to the Council this morning,
they thought it not fit absolutely to recall him, but leave it much to
himself, and desired him to send any of the English horse that is with
him to the west country, where they can be best provided with horse
meat, and most of our own new levied horse we intend should go there
also, and some regiments of our foot lays there and about Stirling, the
rest being in St. Johnston,[1] Dundie, and about this place, beside what
is with Mackay, from whom we have not heard since what I sent you.


P. 248. THE SAME TO THE SAME.

                                          _Holyroodhous, 28 July, 1689._

MY LORD,--On Friday last Major General Mackay marched from St. Johnston
with about 4000 foot, 4 troops of horse and dragoons, and was at Dunkell
that night, where he received intelligence that Dundie was come to Blair
in Atholl; he marched on Saturday towards him, and within two miles of
Blair about 5 at night they engaged, and by several inferior officers
and soldiers that is come here this evening, gives us the account, that
after a sharp engagement Dundie being much stronger, the Major General
was quite defeat, and I have yet heard of no officers of quality that is
come of but Lieutenant Colonel Lauther, who my Lord Ruthven spoke with
as he came from St. Johnston this day, and gives the same account of
their being wholly routed, but the confusion is such here that the
particulars is hardly to be got. We have given orders at Council this
afternoon to draw all the standing forces to Stirling, and has sent to
the west country to raise all the fencible men, and Sir John Lanier has
write to the English forces in Northumberland to march in here, and is
going to Stirling to command, for Mackay is either killed or taken by
all the account we have yet got, but you shall quickly have another
flying packet or an express.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] Perth.




THE BATTLE OF KILLIECRANKIE (1689).

    +Source.+--_Memoirs of the War carried on in Scotland and Ireland,
    1689-1691_, by Major-General Hugh Mackay, Commander-in-Chief of His
    Majesty's forces. _With an appendix of original papers_, p. 50.
    (Edinburgh: Bannatyne Club, 1833.)


Being come up to the advanced party he[2] saw some small parties of the
enemy, the matter of a short mile, marching slowly along the foot of a
hill which lay towards Blair, marching towards us; whereupon he sent
orders to Balfour to march up to him in all haste with the foot. But
presently upon that order, having discovered some bodies of them
marching down an high hill, within a quarter of a mile to the place
where he stood, when the gross[3] of their body appeared, fearing that
they should take possession of an eminence just above the ground where
our forces halted on, of a steep and difficult ascent, full of trees and
shrubs, and within a carbine shot of the place whereon we stood, whereby
they could undoubtedly force us with their fire in confusion over the
river, he galloped back in all haste to the forces, and having made
every battalion form by a Quart de Conversion to the right upon the
ground they stood, made them march each before his face up the hill, by
which means he prevented that inconveniency, and got a ground fair
enough to receive the enemy, but not to attack them, there being, within
a short musket shot to it, another eminence before our front, as we
stood when we were up the lowest hill, near the river, whereof Dundee
had already got possession before we could be well up, and had his back
to a very high hill, which is the ordinary maxim of Highlanders, who
never fight against regular forces upon anything of equal terms, without
a sure retreat at their back, particularly if their enemies be provided
of horse; and to be sure of their escape, in case of a repulse, they
attack bare footed, without any clothing but their shirts, and a little
Highland doublet, whereby they are certain to outrun any foot, and will
not readily engage where horse can follow the chase any distance....
Shortly thereafter, and about half an hour before sunset, they began to
move down the hill.

The General had already commanded the officers, commanding battalions,
to begin their firing at the distance of 100 paces by platoons, to
discourage the approaching Highlanders, meeting with continual fire:
That part of their forces which stood opposite to Hastings, who had the
right of all, before the Generals', Levin's and Kenmore's regiments,
came down briskly together with their horse, and notwithstanding of a
brisk fire, particularly from the General's own battalion, whereby many
of the chief gentlemen of the name of Macdonald, who attacked it, were
killed, pushed their point, after they had fired their light pieces at
some distance, which made little or no execution, with sword in hand,
tho' in great confusion, which is their usual way. Which when the
General observed, he called to the Lord Belhaven to march up with the
first troop of horse, ordering him to flank to the left hand the enemy,
the fire being then past on all hands, and coming to handy strokes if
our men had stood, appointing the second troop to do the same to the
right; but scarcely had Belhaven got them without the front of the line,
where they had orders to wheel for the flank, tho' their very appearance
made the enemy turn away from the place where they saw the horse coming
up, but contrary to orders, they began to pass, not knowing whereat, and
presently turned about, as did also Kenmore's and the half of Levin's
battalion.

The General, observing the horse come to a stand, and firing in
confusion, and the foot beginning to fall away from him, thinking
happily that the horse would be picked to follow his example, and in all
cases to disengage himself out of the crowd of Highlanders which came
down just upon the place where he was calling to the officers of the
horse to follow him, spurr'd his horse through the enemy, (where no body
nevertheless followed him, but one of his servants, whose horse was shot
in passing).... Having passed through the crowd of attacking
Highlanders, he turned about to see how matters stood, and found that
all his left had given way, and got down the hill which was behind our
line, ranged a little above the brow thereof, so that in the twinkling
of an eye in a manner, our men, as well as the enemy, were out of sight,
being got down pall mall to the river where our baggage stood....

The enemy lost on the field six for our one, the fire to our right
having been continued and brisk, whereby not only Dundee, with several
gentlemen of quality of the countys of Angus and Perth, but also many of
the best gentlemen among the Highlanders, particularly of the Macdonalds
of the Isles and Glengarie, were killed, coming down the hill upon
Hastings, the General, and Levin's regiments, which made the best fire
and all the execution....

The General having got the small rests of his forces safely over the
river, and seeing no disposition, so far as he could discern, of the
enemy to pursue him, he bethought himself which way he had best retire;
and notwithstanding of the contrary advice of all the officers who would
have him to descend the plain country of Athole to Dunkeld and Perth, he
resolved rather to march into the Highlands three or four miles, and
then over to Strath Tay and along the foot of the hills, over the Castle
of Drummond, where he had a garrison, to Stirling, whither he resolved
to make all the speed possible, to fall upon some present measures.


FOOTNOTES:

[2] Major-General Mackay, commanding the Royal troops.

[3] Bulk.




THE RELIGIOUS SETTLEMENT (1690).

    +Source.+--_Letters and State Papers chiefly Addressed to George,
    Earl of Melville, Secretary of State for Scotland, 1689-1691_, p.
    436. (Edinburgh: Bannatyne Club, 1843.)


                                                          _22 May, 1690_
_WILLIAM R._

HIS MAJESTIES REMARQUES upon the Act for settling Church Government in
Scotland, Which, together with some reasons designed for the clearing of
it, and answering those objections that might be made against it, was
sent to him by My Lord Commissioner.

1st, Whereas it is said that the Church of Scotland was reformed from
Poperie, _by Presbyters without Prelacy_, his Majesty thinks, that tho
this matter of fact may be true, which he doth not contradict, yet it
being denied by some who discourse much of a power that Superintendents
had in the beginning of the Reformation, which was like to that which
Bishops afterwards had, it were better it were otherwise expressed.

2d, Whereas it is said that their Majesties do ratify the Presbyterial
Church Government _to be the only Government of Christ's Church in this
kingdom_; his Majesty desires it may be expressed thus,--to be the
government of the Church in this Kingdom established by law.

3d, Whereas it is said that the government is to be exercised by sound
Presbyterians, and such as for hereafter shall be owned by Presbyterian
Church Judicatories, _as such_; his Majesty thinks that the rule is too
general, depending as to its application upon the opinions of particular
men; and therefore he desires that what is said to be the meaning of the
rule in the reasons sent to him, may be expressed in the Act, viz., That
such as shall subscribe to the Confession of Faith and Catechisms, and
are willing to submit to the government of the Church, as established by
law, being sober in their lives, sound in their doctrine, and qualified
with gifts for the ministry, shall be admitted to the government, and
his Majesty doth judge that the following Declaration might be a good
Test:--

    I, A---- B---- do sincerely declare, and promise, that I will own
    and submit to the present government of the Church, as it is now by
    Law established in this Kingdom, and that I will heartily concur
    with and under it, for the suppressing of sin and wickedness, the
    promoting of piety, and the purging of the Church of all erroneous
    and scandalous Ministers; and I do also assent and consent to the
    Confession of Faith, and the Larger and Shorter Catechisms, now
    confirmed by Act of Parliament, as the Standard of the Protestant
    religion in this Kingdom.

... 5th, As to what concerns the meeting of Synods and General
Assemblies, his Majesty is willing that it should be enacted, that they
meet at such and such times of the year, and as often as shall be judged
necessary, provided always, that they apply to him or his Privy Council
to know if there be any inconveniency as to public affairs in their
meeting at such times, and have his allowance accordingly; and that in
all their General Assemblies, a Commissioner in the name of his Majesty
be there present, to the end, that nothing may be proposed, but what
merely concerns the Church; and in case anything relating to the Civil
government, or that is prejudicial to it, should be there proposed or
debated, the said Commissioner may give a stop to it, till he has
acquainted the Privy Council, and received their direction in it.

6th, Whereas it is desired to be enacted, that the parishes of those
thrust out by the people in the beginning of this Revolution be declared
Vacant upon this reason, _because they were put upon congregations
without their consent_, his Majesty desires it may be so expressed, as
may be consistent with the rights of Patrons, which he thinks he hath
the more reason to desire, because in the reasons sent up with the Act,
it seems to be acknowledged that this procedure is Extraordinary, and
not to be drawn into consequence....

His Majesties resolution to be candid and above board in what he does,
and his desire, that what is now granted by him to the Church may not be
uneasie to him afterwards, do incline him to have the above-mentioned
amendments in the Act.

It is his Majesties desire, that such as are of the Episcopal persuasion
in Scotland have the same Indulgence that Dissenters have in England,
provided they give security to live peaceably under the Government, and
take the Oath of Allegiance.

                                        W. R.




THE MASSACRE OF GLENCOE (1692).

    +Source.+--_Papers Illustrative of the Political Condition of the
    Highlands of Scotland from the Year 1689 to 1696_, p. 68. (Glasgow:
    Maitland Club, 1845.)


A. SIR THO. LIVINGSTOUN, COMMANDER-IN-CHIEF IN SCOTLAND TO COLL.
HAMILTON AT FORT WILLIAM.

                                                 _Ed^r., 23^d Jary. 92._

SIR,--Since my last I understand that the Laird of Glenco, coming after
the prefixed time, was not admitted to take the oath,[4] which is very
good news here, being that at Court it's wished he had not taken it, so
that that [th]eiving nest might be entirely rooted out; for the
Secretary[5] in three of his last letters hath made mention of him, and
it is known at Court he has not taken it. So Sir, here is a fair
occasion for you to show that your garrison serves for some use; and
being that the orders are so positive from Court to me not to spare
[a]n[y] of them that have not timely come in, as you may by the orders I
sent to your Col., I desire you would begin with Glenco, and spair
nothing which belongs to him, but do not trouble the Government with
prisoners. I shall expect to hear what progress you have made in this,
and remain, Sir, Your humble Servant

                                        T. LIVINGSTOUN.


B. FOR HIS MAJESTIES SERVICE TO CAPTAIN ROBERT CAMPBELL OF GLENLYON
(_idem_, p. 72).

                                                        _1692, Feb. 12._

SIR,--You are hereby ordered to fall upon the rebels, the M'Donalds of
Glenco, and to put all to the sword under 70. You are to have a special
care that the old fox and his sones do not escape your hands. You are to
secure all the avenues, that no man escape. This you are to put in
execution at fyve of the clock precisely. And by that time, or very
shortly after it, I will strive to be at yow with a stronger party. If I
do not come to yow at fyve, you are not to tarry for me, but to fall on.
This by the King's special commands, for the good and safety of the
country, that these miscreants be cutt off root and branch. So that this
be put in execution without feed[6] or favour, as you may expect to be
dealt with as one not true to King nor country, nor a man fit to carry
commission in the King's service. Expecting ye will not fail in the
fulfilling hereof, as yow love yourself, I subscryve this with my hand
at Ballacholis,[7] 12 febrry, 1692

                                        ROBERT DUNCANSON.


C. REPORT OF THE COMMISSION GIVEN BY HIS MAJESTY, UNDER THE GREAT SEAL,
29TH APRIL, 1695, FOR INQUIRING INTO THE SLAUGHTER OF THE MEN OF GLENCO,
13TH FEBRUARY, 1692 (_idem_, p. 99).

                                     _At Holyrudhouse, 20th June, 1695._

... The things to be remark'd preceding the said slaughter were, that
it's certain that the Lairds of Glenco and Auchintriaten, and their
followers, were in the insurrection and rebellion made by some of the
Highland clans, under the command, first of the Viscount of Dundee, and
then of Major-Gen. Buchan, in the years 1689 and 1690. This is
acknowledg'd by all. But when the Earl of Breadalbane called the heads
of the clans, and met with them at Auchallader, in July 1691, in order
to a cessation, the deceas'd Alexander Macdonald of Glenco was there,
with Glengary, Sir John Maclene, and others, and agreed to the
cessation; as it is also acknowledg'd.... And here the Commissioners
cannot but take notice of what hath occurr'd to them in two letters from
Secretary Stair, to Lieutenant-Colonel Hamilton, one of the 1st, and
another of the 3d of December, 1691, wherein he expresses his
resentment from the marring of the bargain that should have been betwixt
the Earl of Breadalbane and the Highlanders, to a very great height; ...
--And, in effect, seems, even at that time, which was almost a month
before the expiring of the King's indemnity, to project, with
Lieutenant-Colonel Hamilton, that some of them should be rooted out and
destroyed. His Majesty's proclamation of indemnity was publish'd in Aug.
1691, offering a free indemnity and pardon to all the Highlanders who
had been in arms, upon their coming in, and taking the oath of
allegiance, betwixt then and the first of January thereafter: And, in
compliance with the proclamation, the deceas'd Glenco goes, about the
end of Decemb. 1691, to Col. Hill, Governor of Fort William at
Inverlochie, and desir'd the Colonel to minister to him the oath of
allegiance, that he might have the King's indemnity: But Col. Hill, in
his deposition, doth further depone, that he hasten'd him away all he
could, and gave him a letter to Ardkinlas to receive him as a lost
sheep; ... Sir Colin Campbell of Ardkinlas, Sherif-Deput of Argyle,
depones, that the deceas'd Glenco came to Inverary about the beginning
of January, 1692, with a letter from Colonel Hill, to the effect above
mentioned, and was three days there before Ardkinlas could get thither,
because of bad weather; and that Glenco said to him, that he had not
come sooner because he was hinder'd by the storm; and Ardkinlas farther
depones, that when he declin'd to give the oath of allegiance to Glenco,
because the last of December, the time appointed for the taking of it,
was past, Glenco begg'd, with tears, that he might be admitted to take
it, and promis'd to bring in all his people within a short time to do
the like, and, if any of them refused, they should be imprisoned, or
sent to Flanders: upon which, Ardkinlas says, he did administer to him
the oath of allegiance upon the 6th of January, 1692....

These things having preceded the slaughter, which happen'd not to be
committed until the 13th of February, 1692, six weeks after the deceas'd
Glenco had taken the oath of allegiance at Inverary. The slaughter of
the Glenco men was in this manner, viz., John and Alexander MacDonalds,
sons to the deceas'd Glenco, depone, that Glengary's house being
reduc'd, the forces were called back to the south, and Glenlyon, a
captain of the Earl of Argyle's regiment, with Lieutenant Lindsay, and
Ensign Lindsay, and six score soldiers, return'd to Glenco about the 1st
of February, 1692, where, at their entry, the elder brother, John, met
them, with about 20 men, and demanded the reason of their coming; and
Lieutenant Lindsay showed him his orders for quartering there, under
Colonel Hill's hand, and gave assurance that they were only come to
quarter; whereupon they were billeted in the country, and had free
quarters, and kind entertainment, living familiarly with the people
until the 13th day of Feb.; and Alexander farther depones, that
Glenlyon, being his wife's uncle, came almost every day, and took his
morning drink at his house, and that the very night before the
slaughter, Glenlyon did play at cards, in his own quarters, with both
the brothers; and John depones, that old Glenco, his father, had invited
Glenlyon, Lieutenant Lindsay, and Ensign Lindsay, to dine with him upon
the very day the slaughter happened. But, on the 13th day of February,
being Saturday, about four, or five, in the morning, Lieutenant Lindsay,
with a party of the foresaid soldiers, came to old Glenco's house,
where, having call'd, in a friendly manner, and got in, they shot his
father dead, with several shots, as he was rising out of his bed; and,
the mother having got up, and put on her clothes, the soldiers stripp'd
her naked, and drew the rings off her fingers with their teeth; as
likewise they killed one man more, and wounded another grievously, at
the same place.... And the said John, Alexander, and Archibald
MacDonalds, do all depone, that, the same morning, there was one
Sergeant Barber, and a party, at Auchnaion, and that Auchintriaten being
there, in his brother's house, with eight more, sitting about the fire,
the soldiers discharged upon them about 18 shot, which killed
Auchintriaten, and four more; ... And, at Innerriggin, where Glenlyon
was quartered, the soldiers took other nine men, and did bind them, hand
and foot, [and] kill'd them, one by one, with shot; and, when Glenlyon
inclin'd to save a young man, of about 20 years of age, one Captain
Drummond came, and ask'd how he came to be sav'd in respect of the
orders that were given, and shot him dead; and another young boy, of
about 13 years, ran to Glenlyon, to be sav'd. He was likewise shot
dead.... And all these five witnesses concur, that the aforesaid
slaughter was made by Glenlyon, and his soldiers, after they had been
quarter'd, and liv'd peaceably, and friendly, with the Glenco men about
13 days, and that the number of those whom they knew to be slain were
about 25, and that the soldiers, after the slaughter, did burn the
houses, barns, and goods, and carried away a great spoil of horse,
nolt,[8] and sheep, above a 1,000.

... And upon the whole matter, it is the opinion of the Commission,
First, that it was a great wrong that Glenco's case, and diligence as to
his taking the oath of allegiance, with Ardkinlas's certificate of his
taking the oath of allegiance on the 6th of January, 1692, and Col.
Hill's letter to Ardkinlas, and Ardkinlas's letter to Colin Campbell,
Sheriff-Clerk, for clearing Glenco's diligence and innocence, were not
presented to the Lords of his Majesty's Privy Council, when they were
sent into Edinburgh, in the said month of January, and that those who
advis'd the not presenting thereof were in the wrong, and seem to have
had a malicious design against Glenco; ... Secondly, that it appears to
have been known at London, and particularly to the Master of Stair, in
the month of January, 1692, that Glenco had taken the oath of
allegiance, tho' after the day prefix'd; for he saith, in his letter of
the 30th of January, to Sir Tho. Livingston, as is above remark'd, "I am
glad that Glenco came not in within the time prescrib'd." Thirdly, that
there was nothing in the King's instructions to warrant the committing
of the foresaid slaughter, even as to the thing it self, and far less as
to the manner of it, seeing all his instructions do plainly import, that
the most obstinate of the rebels might be received into mercy upon
taking the oath of allegiance, tho' the day was long before elaps'd, and
that he ordered nothing concerning Glenco and his tribe, but that "if"
they could "be well separated from the rest, it" would "be a proper
indication of the publick justice to extirpate that sept of thieves";
which plainly intimates, that it was his Majesty's mind that they could
not be separated from the rest of these rebels, unless they still
refused his mercy by continuing in arms and refusing the allegiance, and
that, even in that case, they were only to be proceeded against in the
way of publick justice, and no other way.


FOOTNOTES:

[4] Of allegiance to King William.

[5] The Master of Stair.

[6] Probably fear.

[7] Ballachulish.

[8] Cattle.




THE BANK OF SCOTLAND (1695).

    +Source.+--_The Acts of the Parliaments of Scotland_, vol. ix., p.
    495. (London: 1822.)


ACT FOR ERECTING A PUBLICK BANK.

Our Sovereign Lord considering how useful a Publick Bank may be in this
Kingdom according to the custom of other kingdoms and states, and that
the same can only be best set up and managed by persons in company with
a Joynt Stock, sufficiently endowed with these powers and authorities
and liberties necessary and usual in such cases, Hath therefore allowed,
and with the advice and consent of the Estates of Parliament allows, a
joynt stock amounting to the sum of twelve hundred thousand pounds money
to be raised by the Company hereby established for the carrying on and
managing of a publick bank. And further statutes and ordains, with
advice foresaid, that the persons under-named ... shall have power to
appoint a Book for subscriptions of persons, either natives or
foreigners, who shall be willing to subscribe and pay into the joynt
stock, Which subscriptions the foresaids persons or their quorum are
hereby authorized to receive in the foresaid book, which shall lie open
every tuesday or friday from nine to twelve in the forenoon, and from
three to six in the afternoon betwixt the first day of November next and
the first day of January next following, in the publick hall or chamber
to be appointed in the City of Edinburgh. And therein all persons shall
have liberty to subscribe for such sums of money as they shall think fit
to adventure in the said joynt stock, one thousand pound Scots being the
lowest sum, and twenty thousand pound Scots the highest. And the two
third parts of the saids stocks belonging always to persons residing in
Scotland. Likeas, each and every person at the time of his subscribing
shall pay into the hands of the fore-named persons, or any three of
them, ten of the hundred of the sums set down in their respective
subscriptions towards the carrying on the Bank. And all and every the
persons subscribing and paying into the said stock, as aforsaid, shall
be and are hereby declared to be one Body Corporat and Politique, by the
name of THE GOVERNOUR AND COMPANY OF THE BANK OF SCOTLAND, under which
name they shall have perpetual succession, and shall have a Common
Seal....

And it is farder hereby statute and ordained that it shall be lawful for
the said Governour and Company to lend, upon real or personal security,
any sum or sums, and to receive annual rent for the same at six per
cent., as shall be ordinary for the time. As also, that if the person
borrowing as said is, shall not make payment at the time agreed upon
with the Company, then it shall be lawful for the Governour and Company
to sell and dispose of the security or pledge by a public roup, for the
most that can be got for payment to them of the principal annual rents
and reasonable charges, and returning the over-plus to the person who
gave the said security or pledge....

It is hereby statute that the joynt stock of the said Bank, continuing
in money, shall be free from all publick burdens to be imposed upon
money for the space of twenty one years after the date hereof. And that
during this space it shall not be leisom[9] to any other persons to
enter into and set up ane distinct Company of Bank within this Kingdom,
besides these persons allennarly[10] in whose favour this Act is
granted.... And it is likeways hereby provided that all foreigners who
shall join as partners of this Bank shall thereby be and become
naturalized Scotsmen to all intents and purposes.


FOOTNOTES:

[9] Lawful.

[10] Only.




THE DARIEN SCHEME (1695-1700).

A. THE PROJECT AND ITS ORIGINATOR (1695).

    +Source.+--Bishop Burnet's _History of His Own Times_, vol. iv., p.
    282. (Oxford: 1833.)


Another act passed, that has already produced very fatal consequences to
that kingdom[11]; and may yet draw worse after it: the interlopers in
the East India trade, finding that the company was like to be favoured
by the parliament, as well as by the court, were resolved to try other
methods to break in upon that trade: they entered into a treaty with
some merchants in Scotland; and they had, in the former session,
procured an act, that promised letters patents to all such as should
offer to set up new manufactures, or drive any new trade, not yet
practised by that kingdom, with an exemption for twenty-one years from
all taxes and customs, and with all such other privileges, as should be
found necessary for establishing or encouraging such projects. But here
was a necessity of procuring letters patents, which they knew the credit
that the East India company had at court would certainly render
ineffectual. So they were now in treaty for a new act, which should free
them from that difficulty.

There was one Paterson, a man of no education, but of great notions;
which, as was generally said, he had learned from the Buccaneers, with
whom he had consorted for some time. He had considered a place in
Darien, where he thought a good settlement might be made, with another
over against it, in the South Sea; and by two settlements there, he
fancied a great trade might be opened both for the East and West Indies;
and that the Spaniards in the neighbourhood might be kept in great
subjection to them; so he made the merchants believe, that he had a
great secret, which he did not think fit yet to discover, and reserved
to a fitter opportunity; only he desired, that the West Indies might be
named in any new act that should be offered to the parliament: he made
them in general understand, that he knew of a country, not possessed by
Spaniards, where there were rich mines, and gold in abundance. While
these matters were in treaty, the time of the King's giving the
instructions to his commissioner for the parliament came on; and it had
been a thing of course, to give a general instruction, to pass all bills
for the encouragement of trade. Johnstoun told the King, that he heard
there was a secret management among the merchants for an act in
Scotland, under which the East India trade might be set up; so he
proposed, and drew an instruction, impowering the commissioner to pass
any bill, promising letters patents for encouraging of trade, yet
limited, so that it should not interfere with the trade of England: when
they went down to Scotland, the King's commissioner either did not
consider this, or had no regard to it; for he gave the royal assent to
an act, that gave the undertakers, either of the East India or West
India trade, all possible privileges, with exemption of twenty-one years
from all impositions: and the act directed letters patents to be passed
under the great seal, without any further warrant for them: when this
was printed, it gave a great alarm in England, more particularly to the
East India company; for many of the merchants of London resolved to join
stock with the Scotch company; and the exemption from all duties gave a
great prospect of gain. Such was the posture of affairs in Scotland....

Great complaints were made in both houses of the act for the Scotch East
India company, and addresses were made to the King, setting forth the
inconveniencies that were like to arise from thence to England: the King
answered, that he had been ill served in Scotland: but he hoped remedies
should be found, to prevent the ill consequences that they apprehended
from the act: and soon after this, he turned out both the secretaries of
state, and the marquis of Tweedale: and great changes were made in the
whole ministry of that Kingdom, both high and low....

But when it was understood in Scotland that the King had disowned the
act for the East India company, from which it was expected that great
riches should flow into that Kingdom, it is not easy to conceive how
great and how general an indignation was spread over the whole kingdom:
the Jacobites saw what a game it was like to prove in their hands; they
played it with great skill, and to the advantage of their cause, in a
course of many years; and continue to manage it to this day: there was a
great deal of noise made of the Scotch act in both houses of parliament
in England, by some who seemed to have no other design in that, but to
heighten our distractions by the apprehensions that they expressed. The
Scotch nation fancied nothing but mountains of gold; and the credit of
the design rose so high, that subscriptions were made, and advances of
money were offered, beyond what any believed the wealth of that Kingdom
could have furnished. Paterson came to have such credit among them, that
the design of the East India trade, how promising soever, was wholly
laid aside: and they resolved to employ all their wealth in the settling
a colony, with a port and fortifications, in Darien; which was long kept
a secret, and was only trusted to a select number, who assumed to
themselves the name of the African company, though they never meddled
with any concern in that part of the world; the unhappy progress of the
affair will appear in its proper time.


FOOTNOTES:

[11] Scotland.




B. CONSTITUTION OF THE COMPANY (1698).

    +Source.+--_The Darien Papers: being a Selection of Original Letters
    and Official Documents relating to the Establishment of a Colony at
    Darien by the Company of Scotland trading to Africa and the Indies,
    1695-1700._ (Edinburgh: Bannatyne Club, 1849.)


Know all men by these presents, that in pursuance of the powers and
privileges granted by the 32nd Act of the 4th Session and the 8th Act of
the 5th Session of this current Parliament--as well as by His Majesty's
letters patent under the great seal of this Kingdom, to the Company of
Scotland trading to Africa and the Indies, the Council General of the
said Company have upon mature deliberation _Resolved_ (God willing) to
settle and plant a Colony in some place or other not inhabited, in
America, or in or upon any other place, by consent of the natives and
inhabitants thereof, and not possessed by any European Sovereign,
Potentate, Prince, or State, to be called by the name of CALEDONIA; and
the said Council General, reposing full trust and confidence in the
capacity, fidelity, discretion, and good conduct of their trusty and
well-beloved friends, Major James Cunningham of Eickett, Mr. James
Montgomery, Mr. Daniel Mackay, Cap^n Robert Jolly, Cap^n Robert
Pennicuik, Cap^n William Vetch, and Cap^n Robert Pinkarton,--have
Resolved and fully agreed upon the following fundamental Constitutions
as a perpetual Rule of Government for the said Colony, viz.

1. That the Government Civil, Military and Admirality of the said Colony
and dependancies thereof, shall be and remain in the persons of the said
Major James Cunningham of Eickett, Mr. James Montgomery, Mr. Daniel
Mackay, Cap^t Robert Jolly, Cap^t Robert Pennicuik, Cap^t William Vetch,
and Cap^t Robert Pinkarton, from the time of their setting sail from
Scotland, together with such others as shall be assum'd and added to
them in manner after specified....

6. That all Persons, of what Nation soever, have full freedom and
liberty to trade to and from the said colony under the condition after
mentioned, and that such of them as shall come to live and inhabite on
the said Colony, shall according to their respective States and
conditions enjoy equal privileges with the other Inhabitants thereof,
such Inhabitants first giving up their several names and designations to
be enrolled in a particular Register to be kept for that use....

8. That the Company do reserve to themselves, the 1/20th part of all
Lands and grounds that shall be possessed by the said Colony.

9. That the Company do also reserve to themselves, the 1/20th part of
all Gold-dust, Mines of Gold, Silver, or other Metalls or Minerals, to
be delivered above ground free of all Charges, together with the said
proportion of Pearl-fishing, Wrecks, Ambergreese, precious wood, Jewels,
Gems or Stones of value, that shall any ways be found in or upon the
said Colony or dependancies thereof, and that the remaining 19 parts
thereof do equally belong to the Company and Colony in proportion to
their respective proportions of Lands in the said Colony, they always
contributing in proportion to their respective interests to all Charges
for discovering and working the said Mines and others....

In testimony of all which Premisses, these presents are in name,
presence, and by order of the said Council General, Signed by the
Company's Secretary and Sealed with the Company's Seal, At Edinburgh the
eighth day of July One Thousand Six hundred and Ninty eight years.




C. WHY THE COLONY FAILED (1698).

    +Source.+--Bishop Burnet's _History of His Own Times_, vol. iv., p.
    395. (Oxford: 1833.)


... The company in Scotland, this year, set out a fleet, with a colony,
on design to settle in America: the secret was better kept than could
have been well expected, considering the many hands in which it was
lodged; it appeared at last, that the true design had been guessed, from
the first motion of it: they landed at Darien, which, by the report that
they sent over, was capable of being made a strong place, with a good
port. It was no wonder that the Spaniards complained loudly of this; it
lay so near Porto Bello and Panama on the one side, and Carthagena on
the other, that they could not think they were safe, when such a
neighbour came so near the centre of their Empire in America: the King
of France complained also of this, as an invasion of the Spanish
dominions, and offered the court of Madrid a fleet to dislodge them. The
Spaniards pressed the King hard upon this: they said, they were once
possessed of that place; and though they found it too unhealthy to
settle there, yet the right to it belonged still to them: so this was a
breach of treaties, and a violent possession of their country. In answer
to this, the Scotch pretended, that the natives of Darien were never
conquered by the Spaniards, and were by consequence a free people; they
said, they had purchased of them leave to possess themselves of that
place, and that the Spaniards abandoned the country, because they could
not reduce the natives: so the pretension of the first discovery was
made void, when they went off from it, not being able to hold it; and
then the natives being left to themselves, it was lawful for the Scots
to treat with them: it was given out, that there was much gold in the
country. Certainly, the nation was so full of hopes from this project,
that they raised a fund for carrying it on, greater than, as was
thought, that kingdom could stretch to; four hundred thousand pounds
sterling was subscribed, and a fourth part was paid down, and
afterwards, seventy thousand pounds more was brought in, and a national
fury seemed to have transported the whole kingdom, upon this project.

... Our English plantations grew ... very jealous of this new colony:
they feared, that the double prospect of finding gold and of robbing the
Spaniards, would draw many planters from them into this new settlement;
and that the buccaneers might run into them: for by the Scotch act, this
place was to be made a free port; and if it was not ruined before it was
well formed, they reckoned it would become a seat of piracy and another
Algiers in those parts. Upon these grounds, the English nation inclined
to declare against this, and the King seemed convinced, that it was an
infraction of his treaties with Spain: so orders were sent, but very
secretly, to the English plantations, particularly to Jamaica and the
Leeward islands, to forbid all commerce with the Scots at Darien. The
Spaniards made some faint attempts on them, but without success. This
was a very great difficulty on the King; he saw how much he was like to
be pressed on both hands, and he apprehended what ill consequences were
like to follow, on his declaring himself either way.




D. INDIGNATION IN SCOTLAND (1699).

    +Source.+--Bishop Burnet's _History of His Own Times_, vol. iv., p.
    429. (Oxford: 1833.)


In Scotland all men were full of hopes, that their new colony should
bring them home mountains of gold; the proclamations sent to Jamaica and
to the other English plantations were much complained of, as acts of
hostility, and a violation of the common rights of humanity; these had a
great effect on them, though without these, that colony was too weak and
too ill supplied, as well as too much divided within itself, to have
subsisted long; those, who had first possessed themselves of it, were
forced to abandon it: soon after they had gone from it, a second recruit
of men and provisions was sent thither from Scotland; but one of their
ships unhappily took fire, in which they had the greatest stock of
provisions; and so these likewise went off: and though the third
reinforcement, that soon followed this, was both stronger and better
furnished, yet they fell into such factions among themselves, that they
were too weak to resist the Spaniards, who, feeble as they were, yet saw
the necessity of attacking them: and they finding themselves unable to
resist the force which was brought against them, capitulated; and with
that the whole design fell to the ground, partly for want of stock and
skill in those who managed it, and partly by the baseness and treachery
of those whom they employed.

The conduct of the King's ministers in Scotland was much censured in the
whole progress of this affair; for they had connived at it, if not
encouraged it, in hopes that the design would fall of itself; but now it
was not so easy to cure the universal discontent, which the miscarriage
of this design, to the impoverishing the whole kingdom, had raised, and
which now began to spread, like a contagion, among all sorts of people.
A petition for a present session of parliament was immediately sent
about the kingdom, and was signed by many thousands: this was sent up by
some of the chief of their nobility, whom the King received very coldly:
yet a session of parliament was granted them, to which the duke of
Queensbury was sent down commissioner ... it was further given out, to
raise the national disgust yet higher, that the opposition the King gave
to the Scotch colony, flowed neither from a regard to the interests of
England, nor to the treaties with Spain, but from a care of the Dutch,
who from Curasoe[12] drove a coasting trade, among the Spanish
plantations, with great advantage; which, they said, the Scotch colony,
if once well settled, would draw wholly from them.... In the session of
parliament it was carried by a vote, to make the affair of Darien a
national concern: upon that, the session was for some time discontinued.
When the news of the total abandoning of Darien was brought over, it
cannot be well expressed into how bad a temper this cast the body of
that people: they had now lost almost two hundred thousand pounds
sterling upon this project, besides all the imaginary treasure they had
promised themselves from it: so the nation was raised into a sort of a
fury upon it, and in the first heat of that, a remonstrance was sent
about the kingdom for hands, representing to the King, the necessity for
a present sitting of the parliament, which was drawn in so high a
strain, as if they had resolved to pursue the effects of it by an armed
force. It was signed by a great majority of the members of parliament;
and the ferment in men's spirits was raised so high, that few thought it
could have been long curbed, without breaking forth into great
extremities.


FOOTNOTES:

[12] Curaçoa.




THE UNION IMPENDING (1703).

    +Source.+--_Memoirs of the Life of Sir John Clerk of Penicuik,
    Baronet, Baron of the Exchequer: extracted by himself from his own
    Journals, 1676-1755_, p. 46. (Edinburgh: Scottish Historical
    Society, 1892.)


A Convention of Estates followed the Revolution by King William in 1688,
which was afterwards turned into a Parliament, and continued 'till the
Death of that King in 1702. The same parliament continued to sit upon
the accession of Queen Ann to the Crown, and was not dissolved till the
year 1703, when the new Parliament was called.... I have thrown together
some observations on this session of Parliament in another Manuscript
book, so shall say little here. It was divided into 3 factions, who, as
they had different views, drove different ways. The first was what was
called the Court party; they were for supporting the Crown and the
Credit of the High Commissioner, consequently they were for giving
moderate subsidies for supporting the Government against the insults of
the French, with whom we were, at that time, in war. They had the union
of the two nations in view, because they not only considered it as the
happiest thing that could be brought about for the Interest of Great
Britain, but because it was expressly recommended to them by the Queen.
The second faction was that of the Jacobites; they were to thwart and
disturb the Administration at any rate. The third faction was what went
under the name of the Squadrone Volante. These consisted of about
fifteen Lords and Gentlemen, all Whigs in their principles, but who
herded together, and kept little or no communication with the Duke of
Queensberry[13] and his Friends. They were for opposing everything which
they durst oppose, but to keep firmly in their view the succession of
the Crown in the House of Hanover. They pretended to be great Patriots,
and to stand up chiefly in defence of the rights and privileges of the
subjects; in a word, the public good and the liberty of the subjects
were still in their mouths, but in their Hearts they were known to have
Court preferments and places in the chiefest degree of veneration. These
were the springs and motives of all their Actions, which appeared in a
hundred instances thereafter. However, by the bye, I must say that such
a Squadrone Volante in any Parliament seems to be always a happy means
in the hand of Providence to keep the several members of an
Administration in their duty, for people in great power seldom fail to
take more upon them than falls to their share.

The chiefs of the Squadrone Lords were the Dukes of Montrose and
Roxburgh, the Earls of Rothes and Haddington, all these young men of
about 24 years of Age; but the chief of all, at least the man under
whose name they principally voted, was the Marquis of Tweeddale, a very
good Man, but not perfectly qualified for Court intrigues.

Amongst their Gentlemen was one Mr. Fletcher of Saltoun, a Man of
Republican principles, who had spent his youth in Holland, had been
forfeited under the late King James, but afterwards restored under King
William by Act of Parliament. He was a man a little untoward in his
temper, and much inclined to Eloquence. He made many speeches in
Parliament, which are all printed, but was not very dexterous in making
extemporary replies. He was, however, a very Honest Man, and meant well
in everything he said and did, except in cases where his humour,
passion, or prejudices were suffered to get the better of his reason.


FOOTNOTES:

[13] The Royal Commissioner.




UNION OF THE CROWNS.

A. THE LAST SCOTTISH PARLIAMENT (1705).

    +Source.+--_A Journey to Edenborough in Scotland_, p. 112, by Joseph
    Taylor, late of the Inner Temple, Esquire. Edited from the original
    manuscript by William Cowan. (Edinburgh: 1903.)


It hapned whilst we were at Edenborough, that the Act for a treaty of
Union, between England and Scotland, was upon debate, and having the
honour to have severall Lords and Members of parliament often dine with
us, they inform'd us of the Grand day when the Act was to be past or
rejected, and by speciall favour of my Lord high Commissioner, we had
leave to stand upon the throne by his right hand: The usuall way to
admit strangers is to give them a battoon; which holding in their hands,
shows that they are forreigners. The Lords and Comons sit together; As
soon as we heard the names call'd over, We observ'd Dukes, Marquesses,
and Earles sat on the Uppermost seats on the right hand, Viscounts and
Barons on the uppermost Seats of the left, The Knights of the Shires
under the Dukes, Marquesses, and Earles, and the Burgesses and Commoners
under the Viscounts and Barons. The Lord Chancellor under the
Commissioner's Throne, The Lord Treasurer on his right hand, and the
Secretary of State on his left, and directly under him the Lord Justice
Clerk, and at the head of a long Table, on which is plac't the Crown,
Scepter, and Sword, the Earle Marshall; The Lord high Commissioner has
his Commission always before him in a velvet purse on his cushion.

When they began to debate, we observ'd that the principall leading men
of the High party, or those which oppos'd the Court, were the Duke of
H----,[14] the Duke of A----,[15] the Lord C----y,[16] and the Lord
B--a--en,[17] and one Fletcher of Salton, who speaks well, but with a
great deal of passion, The Earle of S--f--d,[18] who is Lord C----r,[19]
is a very ingenious man, His cheif perfection, and what is most
requisite for his office in the house, is resuming debates, which he
does with an admirable dexterity, by giving soe happy a turn for the
Interest of the party he espouses, that he generally carryes the point,
without the censure of either party. The Lord high Commissioner says
nothing; The Duke of Ar----e[20] was thought, as we were told not only
too young for so high a Station, but too warm to bear the Reflections of
some of the leading Malcontents, but on the contrary he behav'd himself
in this criticall juncture, with so sedate and even a Temper, that he
justly gain'd an universall reputation, and brought the Sessions to a
happy conclusion. The Lord Chancellor determines upon all debates who
shall speak first, when anything is put to the vote, every member is
call'd by his name, and answers singly, approven, or not approven. The
grand debate this day, being about the Act for a treaty with England,
many learned speeches were made on the occasion. Some were for passing
no Act till England had given them satisfaction for the affront they
pretended was put upon them, by the Act pass'd last Sessions in England,
which not only declar'd them Aliens, but prohibited their goods, and
thereby touch't them in the most sensible part. Fletcher said, that
England could not make them Aliens, since they were naturall born
subjects to the Queen; ... After his debate, others were for making the
English Aliens in Scotland, as a Retaliation for our making them soe in
England: ... But after many other debates, and hard reflections on the
English, it was at last put to the Vote, whether there should be added a
clause to the Act of treaty, which should prohibit any treaty with
England, till England had rescinded the Clause of Aliens, or whether it
should be in a seperate way. Seperate way was carry'd by two Voices, ...
The next great point was, whether the Queen or parliament should have
nomination of Commissioners: ... 'Twas carry'd the Queen should nominate
by 4 Voices. Then a Gentleman propos'd to add a clause, to preserve the
discipline and Worship of the Kirk of Scotland, as at present
establish'd: One propos'd it should be the Religion and Discipline, but
my Lord Chancellor told them, that was all the same thing, and H----[21]
said, 'twas not worth a Vote, and his brother the Earl of R----[22]
ask't whether they might not add the Lord's prayer and Creed, and indeed
by what I could observe, they would add the whole Common Liturgy of the
Church of England, for they seem'd to be quite tir'd of the Kirk
discipline: Now the whole Act being finish'd, the Vote was put whether
it should be carry'd approven, or no, and 'twas carry'd approven, by 34
voices. As soon as this was over, we left the house, and that night
Collonell Ogilby,[23] the Lord Chancellor's brother, the Lord
Hardress,[24] and severall Lords and parliament men, came to our
lodgings, and embrac'd us with all the outward marks of love and
kindness, and seem'd mightily pleas'd at what was done; and told us we
should now be no more English and Scotch, but Brittons. And thus we
merrily spent the night, in drinking to the Success of the treaty and
happy union, and next day, Colonell Ogilby and some Scotch Lords
enquir'd mightily for the 3 English Gentlemen, as they call'd us, having
a mind to give us a chirrupping Cup,[25] but we went to Leith that day,
being willing to avoid them.


FOOTNOTES:

[14] Hamilton.

[15] Athole.

[16] Cromarty.

[17] Belhaven.

[18] Seafield.

[19] Chancellor.

[20] Argyle.

[21] Hamilton.

[22] Ruglen.

[23] Colonel Patrick Ogilvy.

[24] No such peer.

[25] Stirrup cup.




B. DRAFTING THE TREATY (1706).

    +Source.+--_Memoirs of the Life of Sir John Clerk of Penicuik,
    Baronet, Baron of the Exchequer: extracted by himself from his own
    Journals, 1676-1755_, p. 55. (Edinburgh: Scottish Historical
    Society, 1892.)


We of the Committee of Parliament for the publick accompts continued our
applications to the matters remitted to us till the Parliament met in
September 1705. John, Duke of Argyle, a youth of about 23 years of age,
was appointed her Majesty's High Commissioner, and in this station
behaved himself in a manner far above what cou'd be expected from one of
his years.... A ... great benefit I received by my intimacy with the
Duke and his brother was to be recommended to the Queen for one of the
Commissioners to be appointed by Her Majesty for the Treaty of Union
between England and Scotland.... This choise, however honourable to me,
was very far from giving me the least pleasure or satisfaction, for I
had observed a great backwardness in the Parliament of Scotland for an
Union with England of any kind whatsoever, and therefore doubted not
but, after a great deal of expense in attending a Treaty in England, I
should be oblidged to return with the uneasy reflexion of having either
done nothing, or nothing to the purpose, as had been the case of former
Commissioners appointed for this end. I was, in short, upon the point of
refusing the Honour conferred upon me, and the rather that my Father,
whom I always considered as an Oracle seldom mistaken, seemed not to
approve of it. However, as at last he grew passive, and that the Duke of
Queensberry threatened to withdraw all friendship for me, I suffered my
self to be prevailed upon, and to take journey for London with other
Commissioners, and arrived there on the 13 of Aprile 1706.

... The Commissioners of both nations met in different apartments in the
Royal palace of Westminster, which commonly goes under the name of the
Cockpit. There was one great Room where they all met when they were
called upon to attend the Queen, or were to exchange papers, but they
never met to hold conferences together except once, when the number of
the Scotch Representatives for the two Houses of the British Parliament
came to be debated, all their transactions were reduced in writings
concerted in seperat apartments. When proposals or Conditions of the
Union were to be made by the English Commissioners, the Scots were
desired to meet them in the great Room, and their proposals were given
in by the L^d Chancellor, or the Keeper of the great seal, who was at
that time the Lord Cooper, and when the Commissioners for Scotland had
any thing to propose, or had answers to be made to the Commissioners of
England, these were presented by the L^d Seafield, then Chancellor for
Scotland....

The first grand point debated by the Commissioners for Scotland amongst
themselves was whether they should propose to the English a Federal
union between the two nations, or an Incorporating union. The first was
most favoured by the people of Scotland, but all the Scots
Commissioners, to a Man, considered it ridiculous and impracticable, for
that in all the Federal unions there behoved to be a supreme power
lodged somewhere, and wherever this was lodged it henceforth became the
States General, or, in our way of speaking, the Parliament of Great
Britain, under the same royal power and authority as the two nations are
at present. And in things of the greatest consequence to the two
nations, as in Councils relating to peace and war and subsidies, it was
impossible that the Representatives or their suffrages in both nations
cou'd be equal, but must be regulated in proportion to the power and
riches of the several publick burdens or Taxations that cou'd affect
them; in a word, the Scots Commissioners saw that no Union cou'd subsist
between the two nations but an incorporating perpetual one. But after
all the trouble we gave ourselves to please the people of Scotland, we
knew at the time that it was but losing our labour, for the English
Commissioners were positively resolved to treat on no kind of union with
us but what was to be incorporating and perpetual....

The Queen came among us three several times, once at our first or
second meeting, to acquaint us of her intentions and ardent good wishes
for our success and unanimity in this great Transaction. At about a
month thereafter she came again to enquire of our success, and had most
of our Minutes read to her, and for the last time of what we had
done....

I was ... intrusted with another province by the Commissioners for
Scotland, which was to review the Calculations made for the Equivalent
to be paid to Scotland for bearing their share of the Debt of England,
which were afterwards to be considered as the Debts of Great Britain.
These calculations were chiefly made by Doctor Gregory, professor of
Mathematicks in the College of Oxford, and a certain great accomptant
and projector, one Patersone,[26] from Scotland, but bred in England
from his infancy....

One day I had occasion to observe the Calamities which attend human
nature even in the greatest dignities of Life. Her majesty was labouring
under a fit of the Gout, and in extream pain and agony, and on this
occasion every thing about her was much in the same disorder as about
the meanest of her subjects. Her face, which was red and spotted, was
rendered something frightful by her negligent dress, and the foot
affected was tied up with a pultis and some nasty bandages. I was much
affected at this sight, and the more _when she had occasion to mention
her people of Scotland_, which she did frequently to the Duke. What are
you, poor meanlike Mortal, thought I, who talks in the style of a
Soveraign? Nature seems to be inverted when a poor infirm Woman becomes
one of the Rulers of the World, but, as Tacitus observes, it is not the
first time that Women have governed in Britain, and indeed they have
sometimes done this to better purpose than the Men.

But to return to the Treaty of Union, the Articles were at last agreed
to, sign'd, and sealed, by all the Commissioners, the 22 of July 1706.
They were afterwards presented to the Queen at her palace of S^t James,
before a very numerous Assembley.


FOOTNOTES:

[26] Founder of the Bank of England, and originator of the Darien
Scheme.




C. POPULAR HOSTILITY TO THE UNION (1706).

    +Source.+--_The History of the Union of Great Britain_, part iv., p.
    27, by Daniel De Foe. (Edinburgh: 1709).


The common people now screw'd up to a pitch, and ripe for the mischief
designed, and prompted by the particular agents of a wicked party, began
to be very insolent: It had been whispered about several days, that the
rabble would rise, and come up to the Parliament House; and cry No
Union; that they would take away the Honours, as they call them, viz.
the Crown etc., and carry them to the Castle, and a long variety of
foolish reports of this kind. But the first appearance of anything
mobish was, that every day, when the Duke[27] went up, but principally
as he came down in his chair from the House, the mob follow'd him,
shouting and crying out, GOD bless his Grace, for standing up against
the Union, and appearing for his country, and the like.... On the 22nd
of October, they follow'd the Duke's chair quite thro the city down to
the Abbey Gate; the guards prevented their going further; but all the
way as they came back, they were heard to threaten what they would do
the next day; that then they would be a thousand times as many; that
they would pull the traitors, so they called the treaters of the Union
at London, out of their houses, and they would soon put an end to the
Union.

On the 23rd they made part of their words good indeed; for, as the
Parliament sat something late, the people gather'd in the streets, and
about the doors of the Parliament House, and particularly the Parliament
Close was almost full, that the members could not go in or out without
difficulty; when Duke Hamilton was coming out of the House, the mob
huzza'd as formerly, and follow'd his chair in a very great number; the
Duke, instead of going down to the Abbey as usual, went up the High
Street to the Land-Market,[28] as they call it, and so to the lodgings
of the Duke of Athole; some said, he went to avoid the mob; others
maliciously said, he went to point them to their work.

While he went in to the Duke of Athole's lodgings, the rabble attended
at the door; and, by shouting and noise, having increased their numbers
to several thousands, they began with Sir Patrick Johnston, who was one
of the treaters, and the year before had been Lord Provost; first they
assaulted his lodgings with stones and sticks, and curses not a few; but
his windows being too high, they came up the stairs to his door, and
fell to work at it with sledges, or great hammers; and, had they broke
it open in their first fury, he had, without doubt, been torn in pieces
without mercy; and thus only, because he was a treater in the commission
to England; for, before that, no man was so well belov'd, as he, over
the whole city.

His lady, in the utmost despair with this fright, comes to the window,
with two candles in her hand, that she might be known; and cried out,
for GOD'S sake, to call the guards; an honest apothecary in the town,
who knew her voice, and saw the distress she was in, and to whom the
family, under GOD, is obliged, for their deliverance, ran immediately
down to the town guard; but they would not stir, without the Lord
Provost's order; but that being soon obtain'd, one Captain Richardson,
who commanded, taking about thirty men with him, march'd bravely up to
them; and making his way with great resolution thro the crowd, they
flying, but throwing stones, and hallowing at him, and his men, he
seized the foot of the stair case; and then boldly went up, clear'd the
stair, and took six of the rabble in the very act; and so delivered the
gentleman and his family....

The city was now in a terrible fright, and every body was under concern
for their friends; the rabble went raving about the streets till
midnight, frequently beating drums, and raising more people; when my
Lord Commissioner being informed, there were a thousand of the seamen
and rabble come up from Leith; and apprehending, if it were suffered to
go on, it might come to a dangerous head, and be out of his power to
suppress, he sent for the Lord Provost, and demanded, that the Guards
should march into the city.

The Lord Provost, after some difficulty, yielded; tho it was alleged,
that it was what was never known in Edinburgh before. About one o clock
in the morning, a battalion of the Guards entered the town, marched up
to the Parliament Close, and took post in all the avenues of the city,
which prevented the resolutions taken to insult the houses of the rest
of the treaters.

The rabble were intirely reduc'd by this, and gradually dispers'd, and
so the tumult ended....

The author of this[29] had his share in the danger of this tumult, and
tho unknown to him, was watch'd and set by the mob, in order to know
where to find him, had his chamber windows insulted, and the windows
below him broken by mistake. But, by the prudence of his friends, the
shortness of its continuance, and GOD'S providence, he escaped.


FOOTNOTES:

[27] Of Hamilton. An opponent of the Union.

[28] The Lawn Market.

[29] De Foe was known to be staying in Edinburgh as the emissary of the
English Government.




D. "AN END OF AN OLD SONG" (1707).

    +Source.+--_The Lockhart Papers: containing Memoirs and Commentaries
    upon the Affairs of Scotland from_ 1702 _to_ 1715, vol. i., p. 222,
    by George Lockhart, Esq., of Carnwath. (London: 1817.)


It is not to be doubted, but the Parliament of England would give a kind
reception to the articles of the Union as passed in Scotland, when they
were laid before that House, as was evident from the quick dispatch in
approving of and ratifying the same; and so the Union commenced on the
first of May 1707, a day never to be forgot by Scotland; a day in which
the Scots were stripped of what their predecessors had gallantly
maintained for many hundred years, I mean the independency and
soveraignty of the kingdom, both which the Earl of Seafield so little
valued, that when he, as Chancellor, signed the engrossed
exemplification of the Act of Union, he returned it to the clerk, in the
face of Parliament, with this dispising and contemning remark, "Now
there's ane end of ane old song."




"THE WEE, WEE GERMAN LAIRDIE"[30] (1714).

    +Source.+--_The Jacobite Songs and Ballads of Scotland from 1688 to
    1746_, p. 65. Edited by Charles Mackay, LL.D. (London and Glasgow:
    1861.)


    Wha the deil hae we gotten for a King,
      But a wee, wee German lairdie!
    An' when we gaed to bring him hame,
      He was delving in his kail-yairdie[31]:
    Sheughing[32] kail,[33] and laying leeks,
    But[34] the hose and but the breeks;
    Up his beggar duds[35] he cleeks,[36]
      The wee, wee German lairdie!

    And he's clapt down in our gudeman's chair,
      The wee, wee German lairdie!
    And he's brought fouth[37] o' foreign trash,
      And dibbled[38] them in his yairdie:
    He's pu'd the rose o' English loons,
    And brake the harp o' Irish clowns,
    But our Scots thristle will jag[39] his thumbs,
      The wee, wee German lairdie.

    Come up among the Highland hills,
      Thou wee, wee German lairdie.
    And see how Charlie's lang-kail[40] thrive,
      That he dibbled in his yairdie:
    And if a stock ye daur to pu',
    Or haud the yoking of a pleugh,
    We'll break your sceptre o'er your mou',[41]
      Thou wee bit German lairdie!

    Our hills are steep, our glens are deep,
      No fitting for a yairdie;
    And our norlan'[42] thristles winna pu',
      Thou wee, wee German lairdie!
    And we've the trenching blades o' weir,[43]
    Wad lib[44] ye o' your German gear,
    And pass ye 'neath the claymore's shear,
      Thou feckless[45] German lairdie!

    He'll ride nae mair on strae sonks,[46]
      For gawing[47] his German hurdies[48];
    But he sits on our gude king's throne,
      Amang the English lordies.
    Auld Scotland! thou'rt owre cauld a hole
      For nursing siccan[49] vermin;
    But the very dogs o' England's court
      Can bark and howl in _German_!


FOOTNOTES:

[30] Written on the accession of King George I.

[31] Literally, vegetable garden.

[32] Trenching.

[33] Colewort.

[34] Outside.

[35] Shabby clothes.

[36] Grabs.

[37] Abundance.

[38] Planted.

[39] Lacerate.

[40] Unmashed cabbage.

[41] Mouth.

[42] Northland.

[43] War.

[44] Geld.

[45] Incompetent.

[46] Loose straw rubbish.

[47] Chafing.

[48] Buttocks.

[49] Suchlike.




THE RISING OF 1715.

A. GATHERING OF THE CLANS (SEPTEMBER).

    +Source.+--_The History of the Rebellion rais'd against His Majesty
    King George I. by the Friends of the Popish Pretender_, p. 187, by
    the Reverend Mr. Peter Rae. Second edition. (London: 1746.)


The Earl of Mar, then at London, not finding how to form his own
interest at court, had resolved on those wicked and traitorous measures
he afterwards followed; and in order to raise and carry on the
rebellion, had, by some means or other, received from abroad, no less
than the sum of one hundred thousand pounds sterling, together with
letters and instructions under the Pretender's own hand, and a
commission appointing him Lieutenant-General and Commander in Chief of
his forces, as he called them, in Scotland: And fearing lest his
traitorous designs against his lawful sovereign prince,[50] to whom he
had so early and solemnly promised fidelity, might possibly be
discovered, and he himself secured by the government, he resolved to
make a sudden tour into Scotland, as the likeliest mean to prevent this
fate, and in order to make some speedy advances in this his pernicious
and bloody undertaking. Wherefore on the 2nd of August, or as some say,
the 1st, in the evening, his lordship, in the dress of a private person,
embark'd with Major-General Hamilton, Colonel Hay, and two servants on
board of a collier in the Thames, and arriving in two or three days at
Newcastle, hired there a vessel belonging to one Spence, which set him
and his company on shore in the Ely, from whence he got over to
Creil[51] in the shire of Fife. Soon after his landing he was attended
by Sir Alexander Areskine, Lord Lyon, and others of his friends in Fife,
to whom he made known the design of his coming, and then went forward to
Kinoul, where he staid on Wednesday the 17th, and on the 18th he passed
the river Tay, about two miles from Perth, with 40 horse on his way to
the north. Next day he sent letters to all the Jacobites round the
country, inviting them to meet him in haste at Brae-Mar, where he
arrived on Saturday the 20th of August.

There is no room to doubt, that he had before-hand concerted measures
with them; and that they were previously advised of his coming, before
he arrived in Scotland: For, on Saturday the 6th of August, their
friends at Edinburgh were apprized of it; and early next morning Captain
John Dalziel, a half-pay officer, who, in view of this rebellion had
thrown up his commission to the Earl of Orkney, was sent out to give the
alarm to his brother, the Earl of Carnwath, then at Elliock, where he
arrived that night; and, early next morning, expresses were sent to the
Earl of Nithsdale, the Viscount of Kenmure, and others of their friends
in those parts; the Earl himself went down that same day to meet them,
in order to forward their measures; and after some time spent in
preparing others, whose inclinations they knew, to embark with them in
that bloody project, they repaired to Lothian; and 'twas then given out,
that they were gone to a hunting in the north. This was indeed a
plausible pretence for their getting to the Highlands, and the more that
the Earl of Mar, to cover his design, too black to be owned at the
first, in calling the chiefs of the clans together, had proposed a
hunting in his own country. Accordingly, in a few days after he arrived
at Brae-Mar, he was there attended by a great number of gentlemen, of
the best quality and interest of all his party: And particularly at
their Great Council, which was held about August 26, there appeared the
Marquis of Huntley, eldest son to the Duke of Gordon; the Marquis of
Tullibardine, eldest son to the Duke of Athol; the Earls of Nithsdale,
Marischal, Traquair, Errol, Southesk, Carnwath, Seaforth, Linlithgow,
and several others; the Viscounts of Kilsith, Kenmure, Kingston and
Stormount; the Lords Rollo, Duffus, Drummond, Strathallan, Ogilvie and
Nairn, with a good many gentlemen of interest in the Highlands, amongst
whom were the two Generals, Hamilton and Gordon, Glenderule, Auldbair,
Auchterhouse, Glengary, and others from the clans....

... Moreover, we are told, that he shew'd them the letters he had
received from Lorraine, under the Pretender's own hand, promising to
come over to them in person, and put himself upon the valour and
fidelity of his Scots subjects; and that in the mean time, they should
be sure of ships, with arms, ammunition, and all military stores, with
officers, engineers, and volunteers, as soon as they could give him an
account to what port they would direct them to be sent: As also, that he
shew'd them his commission under the Pretender's own hand, appointing
him Lieutenant-General, Commander in Chief, and Director of the War; and
assur'd them, that he was furnish'd with money, and would, from time to
time, be supplied with sufficient sums to levy men, and to pay the
troops regularly that should be raised; so as no gentlemen should be at
any expence to subsist their men, but that both they, and the country
should be eased of all such burthens.

With these and other such arguments, which he proposed unto them with a
popular air, he at length prevailed upon them to embrace his project;
and some say, they engaged by oath to stand by him, and one another, and
to bring over their friends and dependants to do the like. However, the
noblemen and gentlemen did not immediately after this meeting draw
together their men, but went every man back to his own estate, to take
their measures for appearing in arms, when they should hear again from
the Earl of Mar, who remain'd, in the mean time, in his own country,
with some few attendants only. These noblemen and gentlemen being
returned home, began to draw together their servants and dependants, in
all the places where they had interest, making several pretences for
doing so, but did not discover the real design till things were in
readiness to break out. And indeed it was but a few days after, that the
Earl of Mar summon'd them all, at least such as were near at hand, to a
general meeting at Aboyne in Aberdeenshire, on the third of September,
in order to concert farther measures for their appearing in arms: And
having there directed the drawing together their forces without any loss
of time, he returned to Brae-Mar, and continued some days gathering the
people, till their number was increased considerably; but the accounts
being so various, while some say there were then two thousand men, most
of them horse, and others but sixty, I shall not condescend on the
particular number: However, with those he had got together, he set up
the Pretender's Standard at Brae-Mar, on the sixth of September, 1715,
and there proclaim'd him King of Scotland, England, France, and Ireland,
etc. 'Tis reported, that when this standard was first erected, the ball
on the top of it fell off, which the superstitious Highlanders were very
much concern'd at, taking it as an omen of the bad success of the cause
for which they were then appearing, and indeed, the event has proven
that it was no less. Thereafter they went to a small town named
Kirkmichael, where having proclaim'd the Pretender, and summon'd the
people to attend his standard, they staid some few days, and then
proceeded to Moulin, another small town in the shire of Perth, where
they likewise proclaim'd him, and rested some short time, gathering
their forces; and where by the coming in of others of their party, their
number was considerably increased.


FOOTNOTES:

[50] George I.

[51] Crail.




B. DEFENCE OF EDINBURGH (OCTOBER).

    +Source.+--_Memoirs of the Life of Sir John Clerk of Penicuik,
    Bart.: extracted by himself from his own Journals, 1676-1755_, p.
    89. Edited by John M. Gray. (Edinburgh: Scottish Historical Society,
    1892.)


In the mean time it must be confessed that their courage and conduct in
Scotland far exceeded what was expected, for the Earl of Mar had so much
address as to bring to the town of Perth, the center of all the
enterprise, at least 10,000 men, some have carried the number to 12,000,
which _I_ am inclined to believe, provided the 1600 men be included that
past the Frith of Forth near the Island of May, of which hereafter.

During these convulsions in my native country, I was obliged to change
my course of living and turn a military man, for being appointed one of
the Lieutenants of the Shire of Edin., I was obliged to act my part in
bringing the militia together. These consisted of a few men, horse and
foot, who never continued 3 days together, and signified nothing in the
military way, the lowland men being a great deal more unfit for warlike
expeditions than the Highlanders who had joined the Earl of Mar.
However, with these militia troops we sometimes made a show, and perhaps
they served to intimidate those who knew nothing about them. They were
particularly useful and active when the Highlanders above mentioned past
the Forth and were marching to take possession of Edin., for being drawn
up on the high way a mile east of Edin., where these Highlanders were to
march in order to take possession of the town, they found themselves
obliged to turn to the right and take possession of the citadel of
Lieth, the ----[52] of October, 1715.

That same night, to the joy of the inhabitants of Edin., who expected to
be plundered by the Highlanders, the Duke of Argyll arrived from
Stirling with 200 chosen foot and 300 dragoons, the foot mounted on
country horses for more expedition. Next morning the Deputy Lieutenants
and all the well affected to the Government of K. George waited on him,
and immediately he ordered all his troops to march down with him to the
attaque of the Citadel of Lieth.

I waited on his Grace, and we never halted till we were within 300 paces
of that place. Here all our men were drawn up in 2 lines for the
attaque. The foot in the center, and the horse on the wings, our number
was as follows. 300 Dragoons, 200 Regular foot, about 200 of the Town
Guards of Edin., and about 500 volunteers, with a regiment of militia.
These amounting in all to about 1500 men, were drawn up on the crofts to
the westward of the citadel. There were likeways two regiments of
militia from the shires of Merse and Teviotdale, who were drawn up on
the Links on the south side of the town to prevent the Highlanders from
escaping.

The Duke called a Council of War, consisting of the principal officers
present, in sight of the enemy, here it was debated in what manner to
attaque the citadel, for the duke had never seen it, and the issue was
that in regard we had neither cannon, bombs, nor granads, it was
impossible to do anything to purpose, for that our men would be
destroied by the fire of the enemy before they came near the ramparts,
for altho' these ramparts and bastions were ruined ever since the days
of Oliver Cromwell, who about the years 1654 and 1655 ordered them to be
repaired out of the old fortifications of Lieth, yet they were
sufficient against such a body of men as we were who came there to
attaque them. On these considerations we were obliged to return to the
town in a very disconsolet manner.

The Duke might have been informed of the condition of that place before
he marched there, but he thought nothing in Scotland, except castles,
impregnable to his troops, and we who knew the citadel never doubted but
dismounted Dragoons cou'd force the place sword in hand. The next thing
to be done was to provide artillery from the Castle of Edin., in order
to attaque the citadel next day, but that night the Highlanders, who
were under the command of one Brigadier Macintosh, marched off to
Seaton House, where they staid 3 or 4 days. Here several detachments
were sent out of Edin. to attaque them, but being without cannon we
cou'd do nothing.


FOOTNOTES:

[52] 14th.




C. THE BATTLE OF SHERIFFMUIR (NOVEMBER).

    +Source.+--_A Fragment of a Memoir of Field-Marshal James Keith:
    written by himself, 1714-1734_, p. 16. (Edinburgh: Spalding Club,
    1843.)


All our troops being now assembled, the Earl of Mar resolved to march
towards the enemy, and on the eighth of November arrived at Denain,[53]
with fourteen battalions of foot and eight squadrons of horse, having
left three battalions in Perth for the defence of the place; the ninth
the army lay at Auchterarder, where he reviewed the troops, who
consisted of about 6000 foot and eight hundred horse. Here we lay two
days, waiting for two battalions from Fife; but finding these did not
come up so soon as we expected, the twelfth we continued our march, the
advanced guard lay near Dumblain, and the rest of the troops were
quarter'd about a mile behind them, the want of tents and the coldness
of the weather rendering it impossible for us to encamp. We had as yet
no perfect account of the motions of the enemy, and concluded from the
inferiority of their number (they being not above 3000 foot and twelve
hundred horse), that they would fight us at the passage of the river,
but we had hardly got the troops marched to their different quarters,
when we received orders to join with all haste our advanced guard, the
Duke of Argile having passed the Forth, and encamped about the toun of
Dumblain, within cannon shot of them. Both armies lay all night on their
arms, and next morning by day break we discover'd a body of the enemies
on a rising ground near our left. Before eight in the morning, our army
was formed in order of battle, in two lines, without any body of
reserve. The Earl of Mar call'd all the general officers and heads of
clans to a council of war, which was held at the head of the line, and
there asked their advice whither we should attack the enemy, or return
to Perth and wait the arrival of King James, who was every day
expected, as also for accounts what success our friends in England might
have; but it was carried almost unanimously to attack, none daring
openly to oppose the current; the Marquis of Huntly only made some
insinuations that it would not be fit to remain in unaction till the
King's arrival.

The resolution being now taken to attack the enemy, the Earl of Mar
commanded the Earl Marischal, with Sir Donald M'Donald's regiment of
foot, and his own squadron of horse, to take possession of the rising
ground on which a body of the enemies horse still remain'd, and to cover
the march of the army on the left (our right being cover'd by a river)
to the toun of Dumblain, where we imagined the enemy still to be. On our
approach, the enemies horse retired; and we had no sooner gained the top
of the hill than we discover'd their whole body, marching without beat
of drum, about two musket shot from us. It was now too late to retreat;
we therfor form'd on the top of the hill, and the Earl Marischal sent an
aid-de-camp to advertise the Earl of Mar that he was fallen in with the
enemies army, that it was impossible for him to bring off the foot, and
therfor desired he would march up to his assistance as quick as
possible,--which he did even in too much haste; for the army, which
marched in four columns, arrived in such confusion that it was
impossible to form them according to the line of battle projected, every
one posted himself as he found ground, and one column of foot enclining
to the right and another to the left of the Earl Marischal's squadron of
horse, that regiment which should have been on the right, found itself
in the center, separated from the rest of the horse, and opposed to the
enemies foot; our foot formed all in one line, except on the left, where
a bog hinder'd them from extending themselves, and encreased the
confusion.

The Duke of Argile was no less embarrassed on his side. His army was not
yet entirely formed; the rear, which was to have formed his left wing,
was yet on their march, and showed us their flanck, which being observed
by Lieutenant General Gordon, he order'd our troops immediately to
charge, which they did with so much vigour that in less than ten
minutes they entirely defeated six regiments of foot and five squadrons
of dragoons, which composed more than the half of the Duke's army, while
the rest having taken the same advantage of our left, which had neither
time nor ground to fire, entirely routed them. Both parties pursued the
troops they had broken, not knowing what had happen'd on the other side,
till at length the Earl of Mar, having had the fatal news of the loss we
had receiv'd, order'd the troops to give over the pursuit, and having
rallied them, returned to the field of battle, from whence we discover'd
the enemy posted at the foot of the hill amongst mud walls, on the same
ground where we had layen the night before.

The Earl of Mar sent immediately an officer to reconnoitre them, and at
the same time assembled the General officers and heads of clans, to
consult whether he should attack them again; but the officer having
reported that their numbers were equal to ours, and the Highlanders, who
were extreamly fatigued, and had eat nothing in two days, being averse
to it, it was resolved to keep the field of battle, and to let the enemy
retire unmolested, which they had already began to do under cover of the
earth walls, as well as of the night which was now approaching, leaving
us about fifty prisoners of ours, most of them wounded, whom they had
not time to carry along with them. We continued on the field of battle
till dark night, and then marched back to the same villages which had
been marked for our quarters the night before.

The enemy had about seven hundred men killed or wounded, amongst whom
was the Earl of Forfar killed, and the Earl of Islay wounded, and two
hundred and twenty-three taken prisoners, and we had about 150 killed or
wounded, and eighty-two taken; but among those killed we had three
persons of note, the Earl of Strathmore, his unkle Auchterhouse, and
Clanronald, and the Earl of Panmure very much wounded. The loss of
colours was almost equal on both sides; but the enemy got five piece of
our cannon, which we could not carry off, those belonging to the train
having run away with the horses when they saw our left broke; and thus
ended the affair of Dumblain, in which neither side gained much honour,
but which was the entire ruin of our party.

Some unlucky mistakes which happened that day, must here take place;
first, an order to the whole horse on the left to march to the right,
which so discouraged the foot of that wing to see themselves abandoned,
that to it may be attributed their shameful behaviour that day; nor were
these horse of any advantage to us where they were posted, for the
ground was so bad that they could never be brought to engage. Another,
of no less consequence, was the mistake of the officer who was sent to
reconnoitre the Duke of Argile's army in the afternoon, for he having
taken his remarks more by the number of colours than the space of ground
they occupied, made his report that the enemy was betwixt two and three
thousand foot strong, when in reality there was no more than three
battalions, not making in all above one thousand foot, the other colours
being what the Duke had just taken on our left, and being almost the
same with his own, he now used them to disguise the weakness of his
troops by making a show of four battalions more than he had, the ground
and mud walls by which he was cover'd not allowing to see that he had
formed only two ranks deep; this mistake hinder'd us from attacking him
in the evening, which it's probable we might have done with better
success than we had in the morning.

Next morning the Duke of Mar, finding most of our left had run quite
away and was not yet returned, retired towards Perth, as the enemy had
already done into Stirling.


FOOTNOTES:

[53] Dunning, in Perthshire.




D. THE OLD PRETENDER (DECEMBER).

    +Source.+--_Memoirs of the Insurrection in Scotland in 1715, by
    John, Master of Sinclair_, p. 333. Edited from the original
    manuscript by Sir Walter Scott, Bart. (Edinburgh: Abbotsford Club,
    1848.)


Before these had come to Huntlie,[54] the King was already landed at
Peterhead, the twenty-seventh day of September[55] [December], and was
in his road to Fetteresso, where he halted. We were not long of hearing
from those who came from the South that a young gentleman had passed
Aberdeen with Captain Allan Cameron; that they had gone straight to
Fetteresso, and it was thought that young man was the King; Cameron was
gone on post to Perth, and the other was left at Fetteresso privately.
This made Huntlie send a gentleman to Aberdeen with orders to go on till
he got the certain account. By the time he got there, he was certainly
informed the King was arrived, and that Mar was already at Fetteresso.
To do Huntlie justice, being present when he received the news, he said,
"Now ther's no help for it, we must all ruin with him: would to God he
had comed sooner." There seem'd still some faint hopes to remain, which
were, that since his Majestie had stopt at Fetteresso, and keept himself
incognito there for two days, till Captain Cameron had informed Mar of
his arrival, his reason for it could only be that he wanted to know the
state of his affairs before he'd go forward to Perth; for what other
reason could have hinder'd him to [have] declared himself at Aberdeen,
or from going straight to Perth? And by all that could be learned since,
we found we judged right; for it's said, that if his affairs were on a
bad foot, he was resolved to return without loss of time, and leave his
poor subjects the freedom of making terms for themselves; a very just
and reasonable thought. Whatever was in it, as his declaring himself at
Fetteresso, and afterwards going up to Perth, put a stop to all thoughts
of terms on our side, so it's not to be doubted that the Government,
however inclinable they might [have] been before, could ever entertain
or allow of any such proposals from those inclined to mercy, or the
moderate people of their own side....

My Lord Mar, who, as we first supposed, would [have] met his Majesty
privately, spread the news at Perth of the King's happy landing, and
brought a numerous train with him to Fetteresso, out of a view, I
believe, to put it out of his Majesty's power to go back, having already
published his being there; and to confirm him of the certainty of his
affairs succeeding, by the approbation of those villainous, weak,
miserable, deluded dependers of his Lordship, who he brought along with
him.

... Thus that unhappy Prince, entirely a stranger to his own affairs, as
much as he had dropt out of another world, or from the clouds, as things
stood, was brought in eminent danger of his life, without its being
possible that it could have any other effect but that of the certain
ruin of his friends, and driving the nail to the head, and riveting the
misery of those who had so generously sacrificed all to serve him. It's
certain that he was made believe that his affairs in general were on a
good foot, at least, very retrievable; that there were twice as many in
Perth as there really were; and that there was no more needful to be
done but the taking of Inverness, which entirely depended on Huntlie;
and when that was done, the King would have a great army from all places
of the Highlands before the Duke of Argyle could attack Perth. As for
powder, I suppose it was never spoke of, since there was no want of it
at Fetteresso; that the news of his Majestie's arrival would no sooner
spread but all would return, and great numbers who had joined them would
come from different corners.... The King was carried triumphinglie up to
Perth.


FOOTNOTES:

[54] The Marquis of Huntly.

[55] It should be the 22nd of December.




E. COLLAPSE OF THE REBELLION (1716).

    +Source.+--_The History of the Rebellion rais'd against His Majesty
    King George I. by the Friends of the Popish Pretender_, p. 365, by
    the Rev. Mr. Peter Rae. Second edition. (London: 1746.)


... His Grace[56] having received positive orders from Court, to march
forthwith against the rebels, he resolved to surmount all difficulties,
and to march as soon as the artillery, and some of the Dutch forces at
Edinburgh, and the regiments of Newton and Stanhope, who were quartered
at Glasgow, could come up to join him; which they did, two or three days
after.... The news of these preparations and march were not grateful to
His Majesty at Scone, spoiling the ceremony of his coronation, and
meeting of his Parliament: Instead of which fine things, the only matter
now under consideration was, how to provide for their own safety; and
the grand question debated was, whether to maintain the place, and fight
the Duke of Argyle, or retreat.... The Pretender, finding that time was
not to be lost, retired that evening from Scone to Perth, where having
supped at Provost Hay's, he rested some hours; and next morning[57]
about ten o'clock, the rebels abandoned Perth, marching over the Tay
upon the ice, and, leaving their cannon behind them, took their rout
towards Dundee. About noon the Pretender himself, with the Earl of Mar,
followed his flying adherents with tears in his eyes, complaining that
instead of bringing him to a Crown, they had brought him to his
grave....

The rebels having retired from Dundee to Montrose, his Grace, on the
3rd,[58] sent a detachment towards Aberbrothick[59] within eight miles
of that place; and on the fourth, in the morning, ordered Major General
Sabine, with 3 battalions, 500 detached foot, and 50 dragoons, to march
to Aberbrothick. The same day his Grace detached Colonel Clayton with
300 foot and 50 dragoons, to march by the way of Brechin; giving orders
to the one as well as the other to summon the country people to remove
the snow on the roads, which, being then very deep, made their march
very heavy and tedious. His Grace having divided the rest of his army
into two bodies, for marching with the greater expedition; and the rebel
army having marched in two columns, on the 5th, in the morning, General
Cadogan with the infantry marched towards Aberbrothick, and at the same
time the Duke himself, with all the cavalry, proceeded by the Upper Road
towards Brechin; the whole army being to join the next day at
Stonehive,[60] intending on Tuesday hereafter to be at Aberdeen, to
which place they supposed the Pretender was gone.

But by this time the Pretender was out of their reach; for having
received advice at Montrose, on the 4th of February, about four in the
afternoon, that part of the King's army was advancing towards
Aberbrothick, he ordered the clans who remained with him to be ready to
march, about eight at night, towards Aberdeen, where he assured them a
considerable force would soon come to them from France. At the hour
appointed for their march, the Pretender ordered his horses to be
brought before the door of the house in which he lodged, and the guard
which usually attended him to mount, as if he designed to go on with the
clans to Aberdeen; but at the same time he slipped privately out on
foot, accompanied only by one of his domesticks, went to the Earl of
Mar's lodgings, and from thence, by a byway to the water-side, where a
boat waited and carried him and the Earl of Mar on board a French ship
of 90 tuns, called the _Maria Teresa_ of St. Malo. About a quarter of an
hour after, two other boats carried the Earl of Melford and the Lord
Drummond, with Lieutenant-General Sheldon and ten other gentlemen on
board the same ship, and then they hoisted sail and put to sea; and
notwithstanding of his Majesty's ships that were cruising on that coast,
got safely off, and in seven days landed at Waldam, near Graveling,[61]
between Dunkirk and Calais. The Earls Marischal, Southesk, the Lord
Tinmouth, General Gordon, with many other gentlemen and officers of
distinction, were left behind to shift for themselves, who kept with the
army, and continued their march towards Aberdeen, the foot marching on
before with General Gordon, and the Earl Marischal, with about 1000
horse, keeping the rear to prevent surprise....

The same day the King's forces advanced to Montrose, the remains of the
rebel army arrived at Aberdeen, where General Gordon showed them a
letter from the Pretender, in which he acquainted his friends that the
disappointments he had met with, especially from abroad, had obliged him
to leave that country; that he thanked them for their services, and
desired them to advise with General Gordon, and consult their own
security either by keeping in a body or separating, and encouraging them
to expect to hear farther from him in a very short time.... And we are
told, that upon reading of the letter, many of the people threw down
their arms, crying out they were basely betrayed, they were all undone,
they were left without king or general. On the seventh, in the morning,
the van of the rebels marched from Aberdeen, as did their rear about two
in the afternoon, and their main body lay at Old Meldrum that night; but
about 200 of their horse, amongst whom were many of their chiefs, with
Irish and other officers who came lately from France, went toward
Peterhead in order to ship themselves off in ships which they knew were
waiting for them there....

Their main body marched straight west, through Strath-Spey and
Strath-Don to the hills of Badenoch, where they separated: The foot
dispersed into the mountains on this side of Lochy, and the horse went
Lochquhaher, agreeing, however, to meet again upon notice from the
Pretender. And here being advised that two French frigates were come for
their relief, and would lay in Pentland Firth till they should hear from
them, the Lord Duffus, Sir George Sinclair, General Eckline and others,
about 160 gentlemen in all, well mounted on horseback, made a sally from
the hills, and crossing the shire of Murray,[62] came to the seaside
near Burgh, where they got several large barks which carried them to the
Orkneys, Arskerry,[63] and other of the islands, from whence most of
them found means to get into the frigates which carried them safe to
France. Other ships coming afterwards carried the rest to Gottenburg, in
the Swedish dominions, where some of them took on in that king's
service.... There were yet with the rebels in Scotland many of their
chiefs, as the Marquis of Tullibardine, the Earls Marischal, Southesk,
Linlithgow, and Seaforth, who having broke his submission, joined them
again in their flight to the northward, the Lord Tinmouth, Sir Donald
M'Donald, and several others of the heads of the clans, who sheltered
themselves for some time in the mountains from his Majesty's troops who
pursued them through the north; and from thence some made their escape
to the Isle of Sky, the Lewis, and other of the north-western islands
till ships came for their relief to carry them abroad; and some of them
afterwards submitted to the Government, as we shall hear below....

The Duke of Argyle having thus gloriously finished the most laborious
and hard campaign that ever was known, he left the command of his
Majesty's troops to Lieutenant-General Cadogan and returned to
Edinbourgh the 27th of February, and in a day or two after set out for
London, where he arrived on the 6th of March.


FOOTNOTES:

[56] Of Argyle.

[57] January 30.

[58] Of February.

[59] Arbroath.

[60] Stonehaven.

[61] Gravelines.

[62] Moray.

[63] Eriska.




F. HARSHNESS OF THE GOVERNMENT (1716).

    +Source.+--_Culloden Papers: comprising an Extensive and Interesting
    Correspondence from the Year 1625 to 1678 ... the Whole published
    from the Originals in the Possession of Duncan George Forbes, of
    Culloden, Esq._, p. 61. (London: 1815.)


No. LXXII.

An anonymous letter, written by Mr. Duncan Forbes to Sir Robert Walpole,
most likely in August 1716--a copy is extant (from which the present is
taken) in the President's handwriting.

Sir, ... When the late Rebellion was happily ended by the Pretender's
flight, his deluded followers found themselves all in chains, or obliged
to surrender and sue for mercy, or to fly their country with him. Every
man concerned in that odious work certainly deserved death, and the
punishment due by law; but humanity and prudence forbade it. It was not
fit to dispeople a country; nor prudent to grieve the King's best
friends, who mostly had some concern in those unfortunate men; or
expedient to give too just grounds of clamour to the disaffected.

It will be agreed on all hands, that the proper rule in this case would
have been, to have punished only as many as was necessary for terror,
and for weakening the strength of the rebels for the future; and to
extend mercy to as many as it could conveniently be indulged to with the
security of the Government; and this maxim every thinking Whig had then
in his mouth, however offended at the insolences of the rebels. In place
of a course of this kind, the method followed was, 1st, to try all the
criminals in England; 2dly, to detain in prison all those in custody in
Scotland, except some who had interest with certain great men to obtain
a previous pardon, to the manifest dishonour of the Government; 3dly, to
attaint a vast number of Scots noblemen and gentlemen; 4thly, to put it
out of his Majesty's power to grant any part of estates forfeited; and
5thly, to appoint a Commission for enquiry, and levying the rebels'
goods and chattels. The necessary consequences of this procedure in
general are two; first, it makes all those who had the misfortune to be
seduced into the rebellion, with their children, relatives, and such as
depend on them, forever desperate; and it's hard to tell what occasions
may offer for venting their rage. We see that want and hard
circumstances lead men daily into follies, without any other temptation;
but when those circumstances are brought on by adherence to any
principle, or opinion, it's certain the sufferers will not quit their
attempts to better their condition, but with their lives. 2d, as there
are none of the rebels who have not friends among the King's faithful
subjects, it is not easy to guess how far a severity of this kind,
unnecessarily pushed, may alienate the affections even of those from the
Government. But in particular, as this case relates to Scotland, the
difficulty will be insurmountable. I may venture to say, there are not
200 gentlemen in the whole kingdom who are not very nearly related to
some one or other of the rebels. Is it possible that a man can see his
daughter, his grandchildren, his nephews, or cousins, reduced to beggary
and starving unnecessarily by a Government, without thinking very ill of
it; and where this is the case of a whole nation, I tremble to think
what dissatisfactions it will produce against a settlement so necessary
for the happiness of Britain.

If all the rebels, with their wives, children, and immediate dependants,
could be at once rooted out of the earth, the shock would be
astonishing; but time would commit it to oblivion, and the danger would
be less to the Constitution, than when thousands of innocents, punished
with misery and want for the offences of their friends, are suffered to
wander about the country, sighing out their complaints to Heaven, and
drawing at once the compassion and moving the indignation of every human
creature.




THE SCOTTISH CAPITAL.[64]

    +Source.+--_A Journey through Scotland, in Familiar Letters from a
    Gentleman here, to his Friend Abroad_, p. 65, by J. Macky. Second
    edition. (London: 1729.)


The High-Street of Edinburgh, running by an easy ascent from the
Netherbow to the Castle, a good half mile, is doubtless the stateliest
street in the world, being broad enough for five coaches to drive up
abreast; and the houses on each side are proportionately high to the
broadness of the street; all of them six or seven story high, and those
mostly of free stone, makes this street very august.

Half way up this street stands St. Giles's Church, the ancient cathedral
of this city, in the form of a cross; but since the Reformation it is
turned into four convenient churches, by partitions, called the
High-Kirk, the Old-Kirk, the Tolbooth-Kirk, and Haddock's Hole. A-top of
this church is erected a large open cupola, in the shape of an imperial
crown, that is a great ornament to the city, and seen at a great
distance. King David erected a copy after this over St. Nicholas's
Church in Newcastle, but it does not near come up to it. Besides these
four churches of St. Giles's, there is in the same street a little lower
the Trone[65] Church, built after the model of Inigo Jones's St. Paul's
Covent Garden; a very handsome church at the east end of the lake,
called the Collegiate Church, built by Mary of Gelder,[66] Queen to
James the Second; a church built by a Lady Yester, a handsome new church
in the middle of the Canongate, and two good churches under the same
roof at the Grey-Friars. There are also some chapels; but they are
converted into halls for trades.

To the south of St. Giles's Church is a fine square, with an equestrian
statue of King Charles the Second in the middle. In this square stands
the Parliament-House, where their parliaments were kept: Also the
Council and Treasury, and all other publick offices. It's a fine modern
building of free-stone, finished by Charles the First in 1636.
Underneath this building is kept the lawyer's library[67]; where there
is a fine collection of books, of medals, and of ancient coins, the
largest of English and Scots coins I ever saw. I could not perceive that
the Scots bore the lion rampant in a tressor of Flower-de-Luces[68] on
the coins, till the Stewarts.

Joining to this library is the Register, where are kept all the deeds
and securities of the nation, as a common bank. Here is also a very good
bank for money,[69] whose notes go current all over the nation. There is
also a fine room in this square for the meeting of the royal boroughs,
adorned with pictures.

In this great street are several stone fountains of water, brought in
pipes at three miles distance, disposed at convenient distances to
supply the whole city with water; and on each side of this street are
lanes, or wynds as they are called here, that run down to the bottom.

This made an English gentleman, that was here with the Duke of York,
merrily compare it to a double wooden comb, the great street the wood in
the middle, and the teeth of each side the lanes.

These lanes lead you to a street below, called the Cowgate, which runs
the whole length east and west of the other, but is neither half so
broad or well built. The High Street is also the best paved street I
ever saw. I will not except Florence. One would think the stones inlaid;
they are not half a foot square; and notwithstanding the coaches and
carts, there is not the least crack in it.

South from the Cowgate lies the High-School for Latin, and in its yard
is kept a fine bagnio, in a handsome neat house, built for the Company
of Surgeons; and in their hall is the picture of the late Duke Hamilton,
Earl Finlater in his Chancellor's robes, and of all the eminent surgeons
of the town, to the number of about forty, all originals, by Sir John
Medina. There is also a pretty garden before and behind the house.
Directly north from this, on the other side of the Cowgate, is the
Physicians Hall and garden, where they have a noble museum, founded by
Sir Andrew Balfour, physician. The learned and industrious Sir Robert
Sebald has very much augmented it. It contains a treasure of curiosities
of art and nature, foreign and domestick, as appears by Sir Robert's
account, printed in four books in 1697.

A little further to the south of the Cowgate is the University, which
consists only of one college: The Magistrates of Edinburgh are governors
of it; it hath a principal or warden, and four philosophy regents or
professors. There is also a professor of Divinity, of Civil Law, of
History, Mathematicks, and Hebrew.

In studying four years at this college you commence Master of Arts: The
scholars are not in commons, and kept to strict rules as in the colleges
in England, nor wear gowns; they lodge and diet in the town, as at the
colleges in Holland, and are required to attend at their several classes
from eight in the morning till twelve, and from two to four. I wonder
how a college in a town used to so much business and diversion to take
off from the study of youth, should ever produce a good scholar.

This college consists of two lower courts, and one upper one, tolerably
well built; the upper court, to which you ascend by steps of stairs, is
larger than the other two. On the left of that court is the library, a
long spacious room, and the books neatly kept, and cloistered with doors
of wire, that none can open but the keeper, more commodious than the
multitude of chains used in the English libraries. The several
benefactions are kept in distinct apartments, with the donor's name
over them in gold letters; and over these cases of books are pictures
of most of the Kings of Scotland, and of all the reformers both at home
and abroad....

Joining to the College is a neat hospital for girls, with a pretty
garden, and bowling-green; and a little further is the churchyard of the
Grey-Friars, the burial-place of all the eminent burghers of the city;
for they don't affect so much as the English to be buried in churches;
that they think smells too much of the Popish stamp....

To the westward of this church-yard stands the most celebrated Hospital
of George Herriot, Jeweller to James the Sixth, for the bringing up of
130 poor boys, children of decayed merchants and tradesmen of this city.
The building exceeds any thing of the kind in Europe. Sutton's Hospital,
called the Charter-House at London, is a noble foundation; but the house
neither of that, Christ-Church, nor anything of the kind at Rome or
Venice, comes up to the magnificence of this building; which I suppose
is owing to Dr. Balcanqual, his executor, who was a great architect, was
Dean of Rochester, and helped King James the Sixth to write his
Basilicon Doron, and was left in full power by Mr. Herriot to build this
hospital, which he hath done more like a princely palace than a
habitation for necessitous children....

To the north of Herriot's work, from whence its fine avenue ascends, and
to the west of the Cowgate, is the Grass-Market, like Smithfield at
London, where they sell their horses, corn and hay, and is as spacious
as Smithfield is; and from it is the West Port or Gate, out of which is
a large suburb, as it is at most of the others. The City of Edinburgh is
a good English mile from the Palace to the Castle in a direct line; and
taking in the suburbs called the West-Port, Bristol,[70] Paterrow,[71]
Pleasants,[72] Canongate, and Calton, may be four miles in
circumference.

This Grass-Market, or Smithfield, lies directly under the Castle, which
is built on a high rock at the west end of the city, and over-looks and
commands it. The rock on which this castle is built is inaccessible on
all sides, except just the front from the town, which rises by an easy
ascent on the ridge of the hill all the way from the Palace: However,
this front is secured by a half-moon, at least 200 feet perpendicularly
high, well stored with artillery, besides other lower works towards the
gate, that make it impregnable. There is also a royal palace in this
castle, finely built of free-stone, with very noble apartments; in one
of which, King James the sixth of Scotland, and first of England, was
born. You may imagine the prospect, very delicious and unbounded from
such a height as this; for you not only see all Edinburgh under you, but
the whole course of the firth from the Bass to Stirling; the coasts of
Fife on the other side of the sea, and many score miles into the
country.


FOOTNOTES:

[64] Edinburgh appeared much like this during the first half of the
eighteenth century.

[65] Tron.

[66] Gueldres.

[67] Advocates' Library.

[68] _Fleurs-de-lis._

[69] See p. 18.

[70] Bristo.

[71] Potterrow.

[72] Pleasance.




THE JACOBITE ATTEMPT OF 1719.

    +Source.+--_A Fragment of a Memoir of Field-Marshal James Keith,
    written by himself, 1714-1734_, p. 35. (Edinburgh: Spalding Club,
    1843.)


... To explain the reasons that now carried me to Spain, its necessary
to go back to the month of August of this year,[73] when the English,
without any previous declaration of war, or even any good ground for it,
had attacked the King of Spain's fleet on the coast of Sicily, and
entirely ruined it, which so exasperated the Cardinal Alberoni, who then
governed Spain with the title of first Minister, that he resolv'd to
assist King James, and so revenge himself on the Whigs, who had been the
occasion of the breach of faith he complained of.... One difficulty
still remain'd,--which was to get the chiefs of the King's friends, who
were in France, advertised of this, which the Cardinal desired me to
undertake. The Earl Marischal had brought with him from the Duke of
Ormonde a little billet containing these words--"Pray have entire
confidence in the bearer," and signed Ormond, to be given to him who
should be sent; and with this and about 18,000 crowns, I set out from
Madrid the 19 of February,[74] and three days after arrived at St.
Sebastian, where I deliver'd 12,000 crowns to the Prince Campo Florido,
for the equipment of the frigats destin'd for Scotland, and with the
little money which remain'd entered France privately....

All things being now ready, we embark'd the 19th of March in a small
barck of about 25 tunns, in the mouth of the Seine, and shaped our
course to pass betwixt Dover and Calais, and so round the Orkneys to the
Isle of Lewis, which was our place of rendezvous; but the wind
continuing at east forced us the Friday after, March 24, to alter our
course, and stand away for St. George's Channel, or the back of Ireland,
as we should think best.... From thence we stood for Cape Clear and the
west coast of Ireland, and after favourable but blowing weather, arrived
the 4 of April, N.S. in the isle of Lewis, where we enquired if no ship
had touched there lately from Spain, or if there was no particular news
in the country; but finding them ignorant of any thing that could give
us light into what we wanted to be informed of, we remain'd there some
days, and at last had accounts that two frigats were come to an anchor
on the other side of the island, on which I went with all haste there,
not doubting but it was those we were longing for. I found them already
sailed, but a gentleman of the country informed me that they were the
same, and were gone some miles farther to Stornoway, the only toun or
rather village on all the island. I went the same night there, and found
them in the harbour at an anchor, and the men still aboard....

The Marquesses of Seafort and Tullibardine came and joined us next day,
and in the evening held a council of war to resolve what was to be done.
The Earl Marischal first asked to know what commissions each had, that
the command might be regulated, and Lord Tullibardine not owning his
late commissions, the command remain'd in him as eldest Major General.
It was then disputed whether it was fit to go immediately to the main
land of Scotland, or to continue in the island where we were till we
had advice of the Duke of Ormonde's landing in England. This last party
was much insisted on by Lord Tullibardine and Glenderuel, but all the
rest being against it, because we might easily be block'd up in the isle
by two or three of the enemies ships, it was resolved to follow the
project which the Earl Marischal had proposed to the Cardinal, to land
as soon as possible in Scotland, and with the Spaniards and Highlanders
who should first join us, march straight to Inverness, in which there
were not above 300 of the enemies foot, who would be in no condition to
oppose us, and to remain there till we should be joined by such a body
of horse and foot as should put us in a condition of marching to the
more southern parts of the Kingdom. The council of war being at an end,
the Spanish troops were order'd to debark that they might refraich
themselves after a voyage of 42 days, and it was resolved to sail for
the main land three days after....

We had no sooner debarked the troops and ammunition,[75] than the Earl
Marischal and Brigadier Campbel proposed marching straight to Inverness
with the Spaniards and 500 Highlanders, whom the Marquess of Seafort
promised to give us, to surprise the enemies garison, who as yet had no
accounts of us; but the same demon who had inspired them with the design
of staying in the Lewis, hinder'd them from accepting this proposition.
We were all in the dark what could be the meaning of these dilatory
proceedings, which was discover'd to be the effects of the measures they
had already taken, for before the Earl Marischal's arrival, they (not
knowing but that he might have a commission superior to the Marquess of
Tullibardine's) had wrote letters in a circular manner to most of their
friends, acquainting them that it was the King's intentions that no body
should take arms till the Spanish troops were landed in England; and
therefore the Marquess declared that till then he would not stir from
where he was, nor even allow any detachments to be made; and some days
after, finding that we had still no accounts of the Duke of Ormonde,
nor of any movement in England, he proposed that without further delay
we should embark aboard the same vessels and return to Spain, from which
with great difficulty he was dissuaded.

But the Earl Marischal, fearing that he might renew the same design in
case the news we expected was long a coming, declared to him the day
after that he was resolved to send the two fregats immediately back to
Spain, they being no longer in safety where they were, for being already
discover'd, it was natural to believe that the Government of England
would immediately send ships to block them up, or to intercept them in
their passage home, and in spight of all the arts they used to detain
them, three days after they sailed; and indeed just in time, for not a
week after their departure arrived three English men of war, much
superior to ours both in force and equipage, who, finding we had put
most of our ammunition and provisions into an old castel, situate on the
shore, under the guard of a detachment of 45 Spaniards, immediately
began to batter it from the three ships, and the same night obliged them
to surrender prisoners of war.

Our ships were no sooner sailed than the Marquess of Tullibardine began
to think of other measures. His retrait out of the island was now
impracticable in the manner he had designed it, and now he resolved to
draw what ships he could together, but it was too late; he had given the
enemy time to draw troops not only from the remote parts of the Kingdom,
but even from Holland. The regiments of Kapell, May, and Sturler, were
already arrived, and his circular letters had given those who were not
very willing an excellent excuse, he himself having already wrote to
them that they should not take arms.

Our affairs were in this condition, when we received the news, of the
entire dispersion of the Duke of Ormond's fleet; but at the same time
our friends assured us that all diligence was using in Spain to put it
in a condition to sail again that same spring. This left us still some
hopes, and therefore we order'd the gentlemen who were nearest us to
assemble their vassalls, but this last accident had disheartned them,
that not above a thousand men appeared, and even those seemed not very
fond of the enterprize.

The enemy was by this time within three days march of us, with four
regiments of foot, and a detachment of a fifth, and 150 dragoons, and
waited only for the provisions which was necessary to be carried along
(into a country full of mountains and possessed by the enemy,) to march
to attack us in our post which, by the situation, was strong enough had
it been well defended; our right was cover'd by a rivulet which was
difficult to pass, and our left by a ravine, and in the front the ground
was so rugged and steep that it was almost impossible to come at us.
However, the tenth of June the enemy appear'd at the foot of the
mountain, and after having reconnoitred the ground he attacked a
detachment we had posted on our right on the other side of the rivulet
commanded by Lord George Murray, who not being succour'd as he ought,
was obliged to retire, but without any loss. At the same time our center
was attacked and forced with very little loss on either side; and after
a skirmish of about three hours, in which not above a hundred men were
killed or wounded on both sides, and of distinction only the Marquess of
Seafort wounded, our troops were forced to retire to the top of the
mountain, whose height hinder'd the enemies pursuit.[76] By this time it
was night, which gave the chiefs of our party time to consult what was
to be done in this urgency, and on considering that they had neither
provisions nor ammunition, that the few troops they had had behaved in a
manner not to give great encouragement to try a second action, it was
resolved, that the Spaniards should surrender, and the Highlanders
disperse. Don Nicolas Bolano, who commanded the detachment of the
regiment of Galicia, offer'd to attack the enemy once more; but the
general officers judging the attempt in vain, the first resolution was
followed, and accordingly next morning the Spaniards surrender'd on
condition their baggage should not be plunder'd, and every body else
took the road he liked best. As I was then sick of a feavour, I was
forced to lurck some months in the mountains, and in the beginning of
September having got a ship, I embarcked at Peterhead, and 4 days after
landed in Hollande at the Texel.


FOOTNOTES:

[73] 1718.

[74] 1719.

[75] On the mainland.

[76] This was the Battle of Glenshiel.




ENGLAND AND SCOTLAND CONTRASTED (1725[77]).

    +Source.+--_A Journey through Scotland, in familiar Letters from a
    Gentleman here, to his Friend Abroad_, p. 269, by J. Macky. Second
    edition. (London: 1729.)


There is no nation where a man hath fairer play for his liberty, than in
Scotland: Here are no Sheriffs Officers, and Marshal's men, that will
whip you off the street at London, and run you into a spunging-house at
once; but here if you owe money, you are summoned to show cause why you
don't pay it; which if you don't do, you have six days allowed you
before a caption comes out against your person; which is executed by
these messengers only, who are all put in by the Lord Lion,[78] and wear
a greyhound on a green ribbon, as a badge, when they are in the
execution of their office.

The ladies dress as in England, with this difference, that when they go
abroad, from the highest to the lowest, they wear a plaid, which covers
half of the face, and all their body. In Spain, Flanders, and Holland,
you know the women go all to church and market, with a black mantle over
their heads and body: But these in Scotland are all striped with green,
scarlet, and other colours, and most of them lined with silk; which in
the middle of a church, on a Sunday, looks like a _parterre de fleurs_.

I have been at several consorts of musick, and must say, that I never
saw in any nation an assembly of greater beauties, than those I have
seen at Edinburgh. The ladies are particular in a stately firm way of
walking, with their joints extended, and their toes out: But I cannot
say, that the common people are near so clean or handsome as the
English. The young ladies are all bred good housewives; and the
servant-maids are always kept at some work here: The spinning-wheels,
both for woollen and linnen, are always going in most houses; and a
gentleman of a good estate is not ashamed to wear a suit of cloaths of
his lady's and servants' spinning. They make a great deal of linnen all
over the Kingdom, not only for their own use, but export it to England,
and to the Plantations. In short, the women are all kept employed, from
the highest to the lowest of them.

But the men here are not so usefully employed as in England: There the
production of every county is improved by joint-stocks amongst the
inhabitants of the several counties. Iron-works, lead-works,
manufactories, and every thing else that may conduce to the common
welfare of the nation, are set on foot, and carried on. But here, altho
their rivers plentifully abound with salmon for exportation, their
coasts with white fish and herrings, more than any other in Europe; yet
the gentry, or landed men, never concern themselves about it, as a thing
below them; and leave those improvements to burghers of towns, who, for
want of a sufficient stock, are not able to carry it on.

Indeed, the nobility have of late run into parking, planting, and
gardening, which are great improvements of their estates; but what is
this to the bulk of a nation, which (if encouraged) hath as many natural
commodities for exportation as any whatsoever, and more than
South-Britain? But a finer education than what is necessary for trade,
hath been, in imitation of the French, the misfortune of this kingdom;
but perhaps the union with England may open their eyes to their own
interest.

The language of the Low-Countries of Scotland is the same with that
which is spoken all over England; only an Englishman will understand a
Scotchman better by his writing than speaking; for the difference in the
pronunciation of the vowels, which are the same in writing, makes a
great alteration in speaking.

The Scots pronounce the five vowels, a, e, i, o, u, just as the French,
Germans, and Italians do; and the English, according to that
pronunciation, make them œ, i, y, o, u. This difference of sound in
the vowels, makes a great one in the pronunciation.

The Highlanders have a language of their own, which the Irish own to be
the purest of that Irish which they spake in the province of Ulster in
Ireland; which is also spoken in the greatest purity in the Western
Islands that lie between Scotland and Ireland: They being an unmixed
people, have preserved that language and the dress better than the Irish
have done, who have been over-run with Danes, English, etc.


FOOTNOTES:

[77] About.

[78] The Lyon King-at-Arms.




THE MALT TAX (1725).

    +Source.+--_The Lockhart Papers: containing Memoirs and Commentaries
    upon the Affairs of Scotland from 1702 to 1715, by George Lockhart,
    Esq., of Carnwath. His Secret Correspondence with the Son of King
    James the Second from 1718 to 1728, and his other Political
    Writings_, vol. ii., p. 134. (London: 1817.)


About the latter end of the year 1724 a resolution passed the House of
Commons whereby, instead of the malt tax, six pence per barrel of ale
was laid of additional duty on Scotland (and not extended to England)
and the premiums on grain exported from thence was taken off. As this
was a plain breach of the Union, in so far as it expressly stipulated
that there shall be an equality of taxes and premiums on trade, every
Scots man was highly enraged at it, for as it was evident that the want
of the premiums would effectively stop the exportation of grain, which
would thereby become a mere drug, no body could foresee to what height
this precedent of taxing Scotland separately from England might
afterwards be extended. Tis impossible to express the resentment of the
nation at this measure, all parties seemed reconciled and to unite in
opposing what was so pernicious to the country in general, and at the
same time touched every particular man's copyhold. The King's friends
laid hold upon this occasion, and privately, underhand, fomented the bad
humour, it not being fit, as indeed there was no need of their
distinguishing their zeal at this time. A meeting of the heritors of the
shire of Edinburgh was called, where I presented an address to the House
of Commons, which being heartily approved of, was signed and next day
sent up by an express to London....

These warm addresses and instructions did not a little startle the Scots
members of Parliament, and even the Ministry; and there were likewise
many private letters written to them by their friends, assuring them of
the highest resentment if they did not perform what was desired and
expected of them. Had these members been endued with a public spirit and
resolution, such applications would have been needless; but as they
consisted of a parcel of people of low fortunes that could not subsist
without their board-wages (which at ten guineas a week during each
session was duly paid them) or mere tools and dependents, it was not to
be expected they would act the part which became them for their
country's service, and therefore these representations were judged
necessary to spur them up to their duty and withal show the Ministry
that the people would not behave so tamely as did their mean spirited
mercenary representatives, who, perceiving they would lose all their
interest and scarce dare venture to return home if they did not follow
the instructions given them, made most humble applications to the
Ministry, who on the other hand being apprehensive the resentment might
be carried to some height, and unwilling, as matters stood in Europe, to
embroil themselves, thought it expedient to drop the resolutions above
mentioned, (which they at first preferred, because they judged it would
be no easy matter to levy the malt tax in Scotland) and agreed with the
Scots members to impose threepence per bushel on malt; being but the
half of what was laid in England; and a bill was accordingly passed as
fast as the forms could possibly allow of, least their constituents
should have time to remonstrate against it....

Some little time before the 23rd of June (on which day the malt tax
commenced) delegates were sent from most of the considerable touns, to
meet and confer with the brewers at Edinburgh, where many proposals
were made for eluding the law, to be, as occasions offered, put in
practice: the first thing to be guarded against was the dutys of malt
stock in hand; and to avoid the heavy penalty of not entering the same,
it was resolved to obey the law in that respect, but at the same time
not to make payment of the duty thereon, and if the Commissioners of
excise sued them, to give over brewing and consequently sink the revenue
of excise, which was indeed chiefly aimed at by those who bestirred
themselves at this time in behalf of the country, that the Government
might perceive they'd lose more of the excise than they could gain by
the malt tax: but what alarmed people most was the unreasonable article
of surcharge, to be levied proportionately off such as entered and paid
the duty of what was malted after 23rd of June, in so far as the clear
produce (after deducing the charges of collecting) fell short of
20,000_l._ sterling, whereby those who submitted to the Government and
paid the malt tax ran the hazard of making up the deficiencie arising
from those who did otherwise, which so startled all the considerable
brewers, who generally speaking are also maltsters, that they found it
absolutely necessary to malt none after the commencement of this duty.

On the 23rd of June, when the duty took place, the excise officers were
obliged to fly out of most of the towns in the western shires, but in
Glasgow the resentment ran higher. Daniell Campbell of Shawfeild, who
represented that burgh in Parliament, having incurred the hatred of the
inhabitants thereof, because he was believed, on too good grounds, to
have had the chief hand in giving the Government such informations of
the way and manner of trading there, as occasioned a few years ago an
act of Parliament, that lay heavily on their tobacco trade, was likewise
said and believed to have encouraged to hope there was no difficulty in
raising the malt tax; and these joined together rendered him detestable
over all the Kingdom, especially at Glasgow, where they threatened to
pull down his new built house, whereof he sent notice to Wade at
Edinburgh on 21st of June, who thereupon ordered a detachment of foot
to march forthwith thither, where they arrived on the 24th at night, but
the guard room being unprepared, they put off taking possession of it
till next day, the soldiers being dismist to their several private
quarters. During the night time a report went about that Daniell
Campbell had brought these soldiers to enslave them, whereupon the mob
got up and destroyed his house, and had he himself been in town, they
had certainly dewitted him. Whilst this was in hand the commanding
officer got his men together, took possession of the guard room and drew
up before it, and tho he met with no insult but from some boys and
women, who threw a few stones at his men, without having previously read
the proclamation, as directed by the law on such occasions, he fired
allongst the streets, which being full of innocent people that came out
of curiosity to know what the matter was, and the windows at the same
time crowded with spectators, about 20 men and women were killd dead and
many more wounded, some whereof in the streets and others in their
houses: the citizens being thereby enraged did ring the fire bell and
brake up the magazine, from whence they armed about 400 men. In the mean
time the magistrates advised the officer to march off his party, for
they could not be protected within the city; on which he made the best
of his way to Dumbarton, but not thinking himself safe in that town he
retired into the castle. The Glasgow mob pursued him a few miles but
could not overtake him.




GENERAL WADE'S ROADS (1726).

    +Source.+--_Letters from a Gentleman in the North of Scotland to his
    Friend in London_, vol. ii., p. 183, by Captain Burt. Fifth edition.
    (London: 1822.)


LETTER XXVI. CONCERNING THE NEW ROADS, ETC., 173-.

These new roads were begun in the year 1726, and have continued about
eleven years in the prosecution; yet, long as it may be thought, if you
were to pass over the whole work (for the borders of it would show you
what it was), I make no doubt but that number of years would diminish in
your imagination to a much shorter tract of time, by comparison with the
difficulties that attended the execution.

But, before I proceed to any particular descriptions of them, I shall
inform you how they lie, to the end that you may trace them out upon a
map of Scotland; and first I shall take them as they are made, to enter
the mountains, viz.--

One of them begins from Crief, which is about fourteen miles from
Stirling: here the Romans left off their works, of which some parts are
visible to this day, particularly the camp at Ardoch, where the vestiges
of the fortifications are on a moor so barren, that its whole form has
been safe from culture, or other alteration besides weather and time.

The other road enters the hills at Dimheld,[79] in Athol, which is about
ten miles from Perth.

The first of them, according to my account, though the last in
execution, proceeds through Glenalmond (which, for its narrowness, and
the height of the mountains, I remember to have mentioned formerly), and
thence it goes to Aberfaldy; there it crosses the river Tay by a bridge
of free-stone, consisting of five spacious arches (by the way, this
military bridge is the only passage over that wild and dangerous river),
and from thence the road goes on to Dalnachardoch.

The other road from Dunkeld proceeds by the Blair of Athol to the said
Dalnachardoch.

Here the two roads join in one, and, as a single road, it leads on to
Dalwhinny, where it branches out again into two; of which one proceeds
towards the north-west, through Garva Moor, and over the Coriarach
mountain to Fort Augustus, at Killichumen, and the other branch goes
due-north to the barrack of Ruthven, in Badenoch, and thence, by
Delmagary, to Inverness. From thence it proceeds something to the
southward of the west, across the island, to the aforesaid Fort-Augustus
and so on to Fort-William, in Lochaber.

The length of all these roads put together is about two hundred and
fifty miles....

In the summer seasons, five hundred of the soldiers from the barracks,
and other quarters about the Highlands, were employed in those works in
different stations, by detachments from the regiments and Highland
companies.

The private men were allowed sixpence a day, over and above their pay as
soldiers: a corporal had eight-pence, and a sergeant a shilling; but
this extra pay was only for working-days, which were often interrupted
by violent storms of wind and rain, from the heights and hollows of the
mountains.

These parties of men were under the command and direction of proper
officers, who were all subalterns, and received two shillings and
sixpence _per diem_, to defray their extraordinary expence in building
huts; making necessary provision for their tables from distant parts;
unavoidable though unwelcome visits, and other incidents arising from
their wild situation....

The standard breadth of these roads, as laid down at the first
projection, is sixteen feet; but in some parts, where there were no very
expensive difficulties, they are wider....

The old ways (for roads I shall not call them) consisted chiefly of
stony moors, bogs, rugged, rapid fords, declivities of hills, entangling
woods, and giddy precipices. You will say this is a dreadful catalogue
to be read to him that is about to take a Highland journey. I have not
mentioned the valleys, for they are few in number, far divided asunder,
and generally the roads through them were easily made.

My purpose now is to give you some account of the nature of the
particular parts above-mentioned, and the manner how this extraordinary
work has been executed; and this I shall do in the order I have ranged
them as above.

And first, the stony moors. These are mostly tracts of ground of several
miles in length, and often very high, with frequent lesser risings and
descents, and having for surface a mixture of stones and heath. The
stones are fixed in the earth, being very large and unequal, and
generally are as deep in the ground as they appear above it; and where
there are any spaces between the stones, there is a loose spongy sward,
perhaps not above five or six inches deep, and incapable to produce any
thing but heath, and all beneath it is hard gravel or rock....

Here the workmen first made room to fix their instruments, and then, by
strength, and the help of those two mechanic powers, the screw and the
lever, they raised out of their ancient beds those massive bodies, and
then filling up the cavities with gravel, set them up, mostly end-ways,
along the sides of the road, as directions in time of deep snows, being
some of them, as they now stand, eight or nine feet high. They serve,
likewise, as memorials of the skill and labour requisite to the
performance of so difficult a work....

Now that I have no further occasion for any distinction, I shall call
every soft place a bog, except there be occasion sometimes to vary the
phrase.

When one of these bogs has crossed the way on a stony moor, there the
loose ground has been dug out down to the gravel, or rock, and the
hollow filled up in the manner following, viz.--

First with a layer of large stones, then a smaller size, to fill up the
gaps and raise the causeway higher; and, lastly, two, three, or more
feet of gravel, to fill up the interstices of the small stones, and form
a smooth and binding surface. This part of the road has a bank on each
side, to separate it from a ditch, which is made without-side to receive
the water from the bog, and, if the ground will allow it, to convey it
by a trench to a slope, and thereby in some measure drain it....

The objections made to these new roads and bridges, by some in the
several degrees of _condition_ among the Highlanders, are in part as
follow: viz.--

I. These chiefs and other gentlemen complain, that thereby an easy
passage is opened into their country for strangers, who, in time, by
their suggestions of liberty, will weaken that attachment of their
vassals which it is so necessary for them to support and preserve. That
their fastnesses being laid open, they are deprived of that security
from invasion which they formerly enjoyed. That the bridges, in
particular, will render the ordinary people effeminate, and less fit to
pass the waters in other places where there are none. And there is a
pecuniary reason concealed, relating to some foreign courts, which to
you I need not explain.

II. The middling order say to them the roads are an inconvenience,
instead of being useful, as they have turned them out of their old ways;
for their horses being never shod, the gravel would soon whet away their
hoofs, so as to render them unserviceable; whereas the rocks and
moor-stones, though together they make a rough way, yet, considered
separately, they are generally pretty smooth on the surface where they
tread, and the heath is always easy to their feet....

III. The lowest class, who, many of them, at some times cannot compass a
pair of shoes for themselves, they alledge, that the gravel is
intolerable to their naked feet; and the complaint has extended to their
thin brogues. It is true they do sometimes, for these reasons, go
without the road, and ride or walk in very incommodious ways.


FOOTNOTES:

[79] Dunkeld.




SCOTTISH GARDENING (1735).

    +Source.+--_Letters of John Cockburn of Ormistoun to his Gardener,
    1727-1744_, p. 22. Edited by James Colville, M.A., D.Sc. (Edinburgh:
    Scottish Historical Society, 1904.)


                                                         _3 June, 1735._

CHARLES.[80]--I have had none from you since my last. We have this day a
great deal of soft rain, which if with you will do great service to
forward both Grass and Corn and may secure many of the weak rooted trees
planted last Winter and also make your lay'd trees strike root if well
earthed.

This I design chiefly for some thoughts about improving of your father's
Garden and land of which if you go right you'l turn a good deal off into
Kitchen and Orchard Garden. In doing of which I still think you might
have made more progress last Winter and by so doing you might have made
a beginning in drawing the people towards a better taste in Garden
stuff, which tho' you had made no other profit directly, yet that, if
you had saved yourself only, as to the expence, would have been getting
[profit], as it would have encreased the demand next year.... Your
father's Garden is well sheltered by the houses and rising Ground from
the one hand and by the high hedge of the other, and he has water at
hand. So he may raise any thing in it the climate will allow of. He has
crowded it with fruit trees, too thick even for them to bear as they
would, espicially when a little older, as in that warm place they
advance very fast. By this he loses the undergrowth also, by which he
might make double what he makes by the fruit from the trees, espicially
they being of the most common fruit, which would answer as well in the
most exposed part of his field. So warm a lying spot should either have
been employed entirely in doubled crops for a Kitchen, or, if for fruit,
it should have been in kinds every spot won't produce, and for that
reason yielded more. I incline to think mulberys would have done of
either side the walk at the lower end, as being warm and covered from
all severe weather. If so, one tree of them would have yielded as much
money as half a dozen of the common apples now in it, and would have
taken no more room than one of the present. I am convinced that if
Mulberys will do any where in Scotld. they will there, it being entirely
covered from Weather and yet open to the Sun, except in so far as shaded
by apple trees.... What I aim at is to turn your ground to the best and
most proper uses, the warmest and best to what requires it, and the
common coarse fruits or herbs to places where they will do and the nicer
won't....

Depend upon it there are people in Eden.[81] who have taste, and if you
can once get into the custom of some who have it, will put others upon
enquiring where they had good things, and this will hold in your herbs
etc. as well as in your Fruit. Do you think it possible that there are
not Families and Taverns in Eden. that would give reasonably for young
pease and Beans in July and Aug^t if they could get them. Suppose now
you sent a dish of young pease or Beans to any of your Customers when
only old are to be had, and desire them to let their acquaintances know
you can furnish the like, don't you think they would go off, or if you
got into the custom of such as Mrs. Thom, who keeps a Tavern, do you
believe she would not find people who would be glad of them, and so
would take from you. Possibly they may not give such a price as just
when first coming in, but if you get a price you can afford them at, it
does your business.... People would presently come to distinguish as
they came in to buy when Garden stuff was first introduced. But our
people are lazie, and saying no body will buy and no body will
distinguish, is chiefly owing to the want of activity, Industry and care
in providing at all or good of their kinds, and bustling a little to
introduce and get Customers at first. We are glad of all excuses for our
sleeping on in poverty and our old jog trott. How shall things be
carried to Eden. and no body will buy in the country are often very good
difficulties and convenient enough excuses, wherein excuse is wanted. I
don't know if you have a Carrier at Orm:[82] but I am convinced one who
understood his business, would get Employment for a Cart such as the
Higlers[83] to the Gardiners who come to Covent Garden use. They would
carry things cool and clean, and one man with two horses in such a Cart,
would carry in as much as four Carriers with 4 horses carry in our
common way and if you put your things up in Baskets carefully as
Gardiners do here, by which they'l not be wet, Bruised or Broiled in the
Sun, the Cart being covered as the Garden Stuff commonly is, in carrying
to Eden. Even care in this will make them fresher and better than what
is now to be had there.

HAMPSTEAD, _3^d June_, 1735.


FOOTNOTES:

[80] His gardener's name was Charles Bell.

[81] Edinburgh.

[82] Ormiston.

[83] Costermongers.




THE PORTEOUS RIOTS (1736).

    +Source.+--_Autobiography of the Rev. Dr. Alexander Carlyle,
    Minister of Inveresk, 1722-1770_, p. 33. (Edinburgh and London:
    1860.)


I was witness to a very extraordinary scene that happened in the month
of February or March 1736, which was the escape of Robertson, a
condemned criminal, from the Tolbooth Church in Edinburgh. In these days
it was usual to bring the criminals who were condemned to death into
that church, to attend public worship every Sunday after their
condemnation, when the clergyman made some part of his discourse and
prayers to suit their situation; which, among other circumstances of
solemnity which then attended the state of condemned criminals, had no
small effect on the public mind. Robertson and Wilson were smugglers,
and had been condemned for robbing a custom-house, where some of their
goods had been deposited; a crime what at that time did not seem, in the
opinion of the common people, to deserve so severe a punishment. I was
carried by an acquaintance to church to see the prisoners on the Sunday
before the day of execution. We went early into the church on purpose to
see them come in, and were seated in a pew before the gallery in front
of the pulpit. Soon after we went into the church by the door from the
Parliament Close, the criminals were brought in by the door next the
Tolbooth, and placed in a long pew, not far from the pulpit. Four
soldiers came in with them, and placed Robertson at the head of the pew,
and Wilson below him, two of themselves sitting below Wilson, and two in
a pew behind him.

The bells were ringing and the doors were open, while the people were
coming into the church. Robertson watched his opportunity, and, suddenly
springing up, got over the pew into the passage that led in to the door
in the Parliament Close, and, no person offering to lay hands on him,
made his escape in a moment--so much the more easily, perhaps, as
everybody's attention was drawn to Wilson, who was a stronger man, and
who, attempting to follow Robertson, was seized by the soldiers, and
struggled so long with them that the two who at last followed Robertson
were too late. It was reported that he had maintained his struggle that
he might let his companion have time. That might be his second thought,
but his first certainly was to escape himself, for I saw him set his
foot on the seat to leap over, when the soldiers pulled him back. Wilson
was immediately carried out to the Tolbooth, and Robertson, getting
uninterrupted through the Parliament Square, down the back stairs, into
the Cowgate, was heard of no more till he arrived in Holland. This was
an interesting scene, and by filling the public mind with compassion for
the unhappy person who did not escape, and who was the better character
of the two, had probably some influence in producing what followed; for
when the sentence against Wilson came to be executed a few weeks
thereafter, a very strong opinion prevailed that there was a plot to
force the Town Guard, whose duty it is to attend executions under the
order of a civil magistrate.

There was a Captain Porteous, who by his good behaviour in the army had
obtained a subaltern's commission, and had afterwards, when on half-pay,
been preferred to the command of the City Guard. This man, by his skill
in manly exercises, particularly the golf, and by gentlemanly behaviour,
was admitted into the company of his superiors, which elated his mind,
and added insolence to his native roughness, so that he was much feared
and hated by the mob of Edinburgh. When the day of execution came, the
rumour of a deforcement at the gallows prevailed strongly; and the
Provost and Magistrates (not in their own minds very strong) thought it
a good measure to apply for three or four companies of a marching
regiment that lay in the Canongate, to be drawn up in the Lawnmarket, a
street leading from the Tolbooth to the Grassmarket, the place of
execution, in order to overawe the mob by their being at hand. Porteous,
who it is said, had his natural courage increased to rage by any
suspicion that he and his Guard could not execute the law, and being
heated likewise with wine--for he had dined, as the custom then was,
between one and two--became perfectly furious when he passed by the
three companies drawn up in the street as he marched along with his
prisoner.

... The street is long and wide, and there was a very great crowd
assembled. The execution went on with the usual forms, and Wilson
behaved in a manner very becoming his situation. There was not the least
appearance of an attempt to rescue; but soon after the executioner had
done his duty, there was an attack made upon him, as usual on such
occasions, by the boys and blackguards throwing stones and dirt in
testimony of their abhorrence of the hangman. But there was no attempt
to break through the guard and cut down the prisoner. It was generally
said that there was very little, if any, more violence than had usually
happened on such occasions. Porteous, however, inflamed with wine and
jealousy, thought proper to order his Guard to fire, their muskets being
loaded with slugs; and when the soldiers showed reluctance, I saw him
turn to them with threatening gesture and an inflamed countenance. They
obeyed, and fired; but wishing to do as little harm as possible, many of
them elevated their pieces, the effect of which was that some people
were wounded in the windows; and one unfortunate lad, whom we had
displaced, was killed in the stair window by a slug entering his head.
His name was Henry Black, a journey man tailor, whose bride was the
daughter of the house we were in. She fainted away when he was brought
into the house speechless, where he only lived till nine or ten o'clock.
We had seen many people, women and men, fall in the street, and at first
thought it was only through fear, and by their crowding on one another
to escape. But when the crowd dispersed, we saw them lying dead or
wounded, and had no longer any doubt of what had happened. The numbers
were said to be eight or nine killed, and double the number wounded; but
this was never exactly known.

This unprovoked slaughter irritated the common people to the last; and
the state of grief and rage into which their minds were thrown, was
visible in the high commotion that appeared in the multitude.... The
sequel of this affair was, that Porteous was tried and condemned to be
hanged; but by the intercession of some of the Judges themselves, who
thought his case hard, he was reprieved by the Queen-Regent. The
Magistrates, who on this occasion, as on the former, acted weakly,
designed to have him removed to the Castle for greater security. But a
plot was laid and conducted by some persons unknown with the greatest
secrecy, policy, and vigour, to prevent that design, by forcing the
prison the night before, and executing the sentence upon him themselves,
which to effectuate cost them from eight at night till two in the
morning; and yet this plot was managed so dexterously that they met with
no interruption, though there were five companies of a marching regiment
lying in the Canongate.

This happened on the 7th of September, 1736; and so prepossessed were
the minds of every person that something extraordinary would take place
that day, that I, at Prestonpans, nine miles from Edinburgh, dreamt that
I saw Captain Porteous hanged in the Grassmarket. I got up betwixt six
and seven, and went to my father's servant, who was thrashing in the
barn which lay on the roadside leading to Aberlady and North Berwick,
who said that several men on horseback had passed about five in the
morning, whom having asked for news, they replied there was none, but
that Captain Porteous had been dragged out of prison, and hanged on a
dyer's tree at two o'clock that morning.

This bold and lawless deed not only provoked the Queen, who was Regent
at the time, but gave some uneasiness to Government. It was represented
as a dangerous plot, and was ignorantly connected with a great meeting
of zealous Covenanters, of whom many still remained in Galloway and the
west, which had been held in summer, in Pentland Hills, to renew the
Covenant. But this was a mistake; for the murder of Porteous had been
planned and executed by a few of the relations or friends of those whom
he had slain; who, being of a rank superior to mere mob, had carried on
their design with so much secrecy, ability, and steadiness as made it be
ascribed to a still higher order, who were political enemies to
Government.




THE "CAMBUSLANG WARK" (1742).

    +Source.+--_The Statistical Account of Scotland, drawn up from the
    communications of the ministers of the different parishes_, vol. v.,
    p. 266, by Sir John Sinclair, Bart. (Edinburgh: 1793.)


_Statistical Account of Cambuslang._

In the statistical account of this parish, it will doubtless be
expected, that some mention should be made of those remarkable religious
phenomena, which took place under Mr. M'Culloch's ministry, commonly
called "Cambuslang conversions." In treating of this subject, it will be
proper to give a brief historical view, first of the facts, and then of
the opinions entertained concerning them.

The kirk of Cambuslang being small and in bad repair, the minister, when
the weather was favourable, used to preach in a tent, erected close by a
rivulet, at the foot of a bank or brae near the kirk; which is still
called "the preaching or conversion brae."... Towards the end of
January, 1742, two persons, Ingram More, a shoemaker, and Robert Bowman,
a weaver, went through the parish, and got about 90 heads of families to
subscribe a petition, which was presented to the minister, desiring that
he would give them a weekly lecture.... On Monday, 15th February, and
the two following days, all the fellowship meetings in the parish
convened in one body in the minister's house, and were employed for many
hours in fervent prayer for the success of the gospel, and for an
outpouring of the Holy Spirit in their bounds, as in other places
abroad: The next day, being Thursday 18th February, nothing remarkable
happened during the lecture, except that the hearers were apparently all
attention; but when the minister in his last prayer expressed himself
thus: "Lord who hath believed our report; and to whom is the arm of the
Lord revealed? where are the fruits of my poor labours among this
people?" several persons in the congregation cried out publicly, and
about 50 men and women came to the minister's house, expressing strong
conviction of sin, and alarming fears of punishment. After this period,
so many people from the neighbourhood resorted to Cambuslang, that the
minister thought himself obliged to provide them with daily sermons or
exhortations, and actually did so for 7 or 8 months.

The way in which the converts were affected, for it seems they were all
affected much in the same way, though in very different degrees, is thus
described. They were seized all at once, commonly by something said in
the sermons or prayers, with the most dreadful apprehensions concerning
the state of their souls, insomuch that many of them could not abstain
from crying out in the most public and dreadful manner, ... The agony
under which they laboured, was expressed not only by words, but also by
violent agitations of body; by clapping their hands and beating their
breasts; by shaking and trembling; by faintings and convulsions; and
sometimes by excessive bleeding at the nose. While they were in this
distress, the minister often called out to them, not to stifle or
smother their convictions, but to encourage them; and, after sermon was
ended, he retired with them to the manse, and frequently spent the best
part of the night with them in exhortations and prayers. Next day before
sermon began, they were brought out, commonly by More and Bowman, and
having napkins tied round their heads, were placed all together on seats
before the tent, where they remained sobbing, weeping, and often crying
aloud, till the service was over. Some of those who fell under
conviction were never converted; but most of those who fell under it
were converted in a few days, and sometimes in a few hours.... From the
time of their conviction to their conversion, many had no appetite for
food, or inclination to sleep, and all complained of the severity of
their sufferings during that interval.

This singular work soon became public, made a great noise, and brought
vast numbers of people from all quarters.... Among those who resorted to
Cambuslang on this occasion, there were many of the most popular
ministers in Scotland; ... M^r Whitefield,[84] who had been in England
for several months, did not arrive till June. The sacrament was given
twice in the space of 5 weeks, viz. on 11th July and 15th August.
Immense multitudes of hearers and spectators were present at both, but
especially at the last. On the Sunday, besides the tent at the foot of
the brae above described, where the sacrament was dispensed, other two
tents were erected. At each of these there was a very great
congregation. M^r Whitefield, who was accustomed to numerous audiences,
supposed, that at the three tents, there were upwards of 30,000 people;
a greater number probably than was ever seen on any other sacramental
occasion. Most of the above mentioned ministers and others were
assistants at this solemnity. Four preached on the fast-day, 4 on
Saturday, probably 14 or 15 on Sunday, and 5 on Monday. There were 25
tables, about 120 at each, in all 3,000 communicants. A great many of
these came from Glasgow and the neighbourhood, about 200 from Edinburgh,
about 200 from Kilmarnock, about 200 from Irvine and Stewarton, and some
from England and Ireland.... The Cambuslang work continued for about six
months, that is, from the 18th February till the second communion.


FOOTNOTES:

[84] George Whitefield, the friend of Wesley.




THE "FORTY-FIVE."

A. PRINCE CHARLES LANDS IN SCOTLAND (JULY 1745).

    +Source.+--_Culloden Papers: comprising an Extensive and Interesting
    Correspondence from the Year 1625 to 1748 ... the Whole published
    from the Originals in the Possession of Duncan George Forbes, of
    Culloden, Esq._, p. 203. (London: 1815.)


_The Lord President to Mr. Pelham._

                                                     _2^nd Aug^t, 1745._
 DEAR SIR,

In a state of profound tranquillity, we have been alarmed with advices,
which are said to have been received at London, of intended invasions;
and particularly of a visit which the Pretender's eldest son is about to
make to us, if he has not already made it. These informations,
particularly as to the visit just mentioned, I must confess, have not
hitherto gain'd my belief. This young gentleman's game seems at present
to be very desperate in this country; and, so far as I can learn, there
is not the least apparatus for his reception, even amongst the few
highlanders who are suspected to be in his interest. However, as, when
so much is at stake, no advice, how improbable soever, is to be
neglected, I have (our session being now over) resolved to make my
accustomed journey northwards a little earlier than usual; to the end
that, though my fighting days are over, I may give some countenance to
the friends of the government, and prevent the seduction of the unwary,
if there should be any truth in what is reported.


_Mr. Normand MacLeod to the Lord President._

MY DEAREST LORD,

To my no small surprise, it is certain that the Pretended Prince of
Wales is come on the coast of South Uist and Barra, and has since been
hovering on parts of the coast of the main land that lies between the
point of Airdnamurchan and Glenelg; he has but one ship, of which he is
aboard; she mounts about 16 or 18 guns. He has about thirty Irish or
French officers with him, and one Sheridan, who is called his Governor.
The Duke of Athol's brother is the only man of any sort of note (that
once belonged to this country) that I can hear of that's alongst with
him. His view, I need not tell you, was, to raise all the Highlands to
assist him, etc. Sir Alex. Macdonald and I, not only gave no sort of
countenance to these people, but we used all the interest we had with
our neighbours to follow the same prudent method; and I am persuaded we
have done it with that success, that not one man of any consequence
benorth the Grampians will give any sort of assistance to this mad
rebellious attempt. How far you think we acted properly, I shall long to
know; but this is certain, we did it as our duty and for the best; for
in the present situation of affairs in Europe, I should have been sorry
to see any thing like disaffection to the Government appear, tho' ever
so trivial; or that there was occasion to march a single company to
quell it, which now I hope and dare say there is not....

                        I ever am, most faithfully, Yours,
                                        NORMAND MACLEOD.
 DUNVEGAN, _3^rd Aug^t_, 1745.




B. RAISING THE PRINCE'S STANDARD (AUGUST).

    +Source.+--_Memorials of John Murray of Broughton, sometime
    Secretary to Prince Charles Edward, 1740-1747_, p. 168. Edited by
    Robert Fitzroy Bell. (Edinburgh: Scottish Historical Society, 1898.)


The Chevalier was now preparing to come to the rendezvous at Glenphinan
the 18 of Agust, and accordingly arrived there the 17th in the evening
with only three companys of Clanronalds followers. The next day Locheil
joined him with seven hundred and fifty men besides double officers, and
M^cdonald of Keppoch arrived in the afternoon with his regiment
consisting of about three hundred. In less than an hour after the whole
were drawn up, and the Royal Standart display'd by the D. of A[thole]
when the Chevalier made them a short but very pathetick speech.
Importing that it would be no purpose to declaim upon the justice of his
father's title to the throne to people who, had they not been convinced
of it, would not have appeared in his behalf, but that he esteemed it as
much his duty to endeavour to procure their welfare and happiness as
they did to assert his right, that it was chiefly with that view that he
had landed in a part of the Island where he knew he should find a number
of brave gentlemen fired with the "noble example of their predecessors,
and jealous of their own and their country's honour, to join with him in
so glorious an enterprise, with whose assistance and the protection of a
just God who never fails to avenge the cause of the injured, he did not
doubt of bringing the affair to a happy issue...."

Everything now being prepared for the Chevalier's departure, upon the
21st he moved from the place of rendezvous to the head of Locheil, about
nine miles from Fort William, and as the difficulty of finding horses
and the badness of the roads in this country were equally
unsurmountable, of twenty large swevel guns he made twelve be buried in
a bog about a mile from the place where he first erected his standard.
He had no sooner arrived at the above mentioned place than he received
intelligence of G[eneral] C[ope] having moved north ward and at the same
time had a copy of the proclamation sent which had been ishued by order
of the Lords Justices, affixing thirty thousand pound upon his head....

Upon seeing it he was heard to say that tho it was true that a reward
had been likewise set upon his father's head in the year 1715, that yet
he imagined that in proportion as the world grew in politeness they had
done so in humanity, that it were unjust to call the ancients rude and
savage etc., when no example could be given of their taking so mean and
unmanly a way to get rid of their enemy. That he should have been far
from ever thinking of such a device to exterminate the E[lector]s family
did his success depend upon it, but at the same time he could not in
justice to him self get[85] by offering the same reward in his turn. Tho
if he could allow himself to think that any of his friends could be so
abandoned as to be guilty of so execrable a deed for the sum proposed,
that he would alter the sum to thirty pound instead of thirty thousand,
and then ordered a proclamation of the same nature to be drawn, which
was signed and published two days after.


FOOTNOTES:

[85] = avoid.




C. THE CAPTURE OF EDINBURGH (SEPTEMBER).

    +Source.+--_The History of the Rebellion in the year 1745_, p. 86,
    by John Home, Esq. (London: 1802.)


The night between the 15^th and 16^th of September passed without
disturbance. Six or seven hundred men, consisting of the Trained Bands,
the Edinburgh volunteers, and some volunteers who came in from the
towns of Musselburgh and Dalkeith, were upon guard at the different
gates of the city. On Monday the 16^th the rebels advanced slowly
towards Edinburgh, giving time for the terror of their approach to
operate upon the minds of unwarlike citizens, in a divided city. Between
ten and eleven o'clock in the forenoon, a message was delivered from the
young Pretender to the people of Edinburgh, acquainting them that if
they would admit him peaceably into the city, they should be civilly
dealt with, if not they must lay their account with military execution.

Instantly the clamour rose, and crowds of people ran about the streets
crying out, that it was madness to think of resistance, since the
dragoons were fled; and some of them meeting Provost Stuart, as he
returned from the West Port (where he had gone to give orders after the
retreat of the dragoons), followed him to the Parliament Square,
beseeching him not to persist in defending the town, for if he did they
should all be murdered. The Provost reprimanded them; and went to the
Goldsmiths' Hall, where the Magistrates and Town Council were assembled,
with a good many of the inhabitants. A deputation was sent to the
Justice Clerk, the Advocate, and the Solicitor, to entreat that they
would come and assist the Council with their advice. The deputies
returned, and reported that all these gentlemen had left the town.
Provost Stuart then sent for the captains of the volunteers, and the
Trained Bands, and desired to have their opinion concerning the defence
of the town. The officers said very little, and seemed to be at a loss
what opinion to give; other people in the meeting made speeches for and
against the defence of the town, not without reproach and abuse on both
sides. The crowd encreased to such a degree, that it became necessary to
adjourn to a larger place, and the meeting adjourned to the New Church
Aisle, which was immediately filled with people, the most part of whom
called to give up the town; that it was impossible to defend it. Those
who attempted to speak against the general opinion, were borne down with
noise and clamour....

About ten o'clock at night the deputies[86] returned, and brought a
letter in answer to the message sent by them.

"His Royal Highness the Prince Regent thinks his Manifesto, and the King
his father's declaration already published, a sufficient capitulation
for all His Majesty's subjects to accept of with joy. His present
demands are to be received into the city, as the son and representative
of the King his father, and obeyed as such when there, His Royal
Highness supposes, that since the receipt of his letter to the Provost,
no arms or ammunition have been suffered to be carried off or concealed,
and will expect a particular account of all things of that nature.
Lastly, he expects a positive answer, before two o'clock in the morning,
otherwise he will think himself obliged to take measures conform.

"At Gray's Mill, 16^th September, 1745. By his Highness's command.

                                        "(Signed) J. Murray."

When this letter was read, Provost Stuart said, there was one condition
in it, which he would die rather than submit to, which was receiving the
son of the Pretender as Prince Regent; for he was bound by oath to
another master. After long deliberation it was determined to send out
deputies once more, to beg a suspension of hostilities till nine o'clock
in the morning, that the Magistrates might have an opportunity of
conversing with the citizens, most of whom were gone to bed. The
deputies were also instructed to receive an explanation of what was
meant by receiving Charles as Prince Regent.

About two o'clock in the morning the deputies set out in a hackney coach
for Gray's Mill; when they arrived there they prevailed upon Lord George
Murray to second their application for a delay; but Charles refused to
grant it; and the deputies were ordered in his name to get them gone.

The coach brought them back to Edinburgh, set them down in the
High-Street, and then drove towards the Canongate. When the Nether Bow
port was opened to let out the coach, 800 Highlanders, led by Cameron of
Locheil, rushed in and took possession of the city.

It was about five o'clock in the morning when the rebels entered
Edinburgh. They immediately sent parties to all the other gates, and to
the town guard, who making the soldiers upon duty prisoners, occupied
their posts as quietly as one guard relieves another. When the
inhabitants of Edinburgh awakened in the morning, they found that the
Highlanders were masters of the city.


FOOTNOTES:

[86] Who had been sent to parley with the rebels.




D. PRINCE CHARLES AT HOLYROOD (SEPTEMBER).

    +Source.+--_The History of the Rebellion in the year 1745_, p. 99,
    by John Home, Esq. (London: 1802.)


About ten o'clock[87] the main body of the rebels marching by
Duddingston (to avoid being fired upon by the Castle) entered the King's
Park, and halted in the hollow between the hills, under the peak called
Arthur's seat. By and by Charles came down to the Duke's Walk,
accompanied by the Highland Chiefs, and other commanders of his army.

The Park was full of people (amongst whom was the author of this
history,) all of them impatient to see this extraordinary person. The
figure and presence of Charles Stuart were not ill suited to his lofty
pretensions. He was in the prime of youth, tall and handsome, of a fair
complexion; he had a light coloured periwig with his own hair combed
over the front: he wore the Highland dress, that is a tartan short coat
without the plaid, a blue bonnet on his head, and on his breast the star
of the order of St. Andrew. Charles stood some time in the park to show
himself to the people; and then, though he was very near the palace,
mounted his horse, either to render himself more conspicuous, or because
he rode well, and looked graceful on horseback.

The Jacobites were charmed with his appearance: they compared him to
Robert the Bruce, whom he resembled (they said) in his figure as in his
fortune. The Whigs looked upon him with other eyes. They acknowledged
that he was a goodly person; but they observed, that even in that
triumphant hour, when he was about to enter the palace of his fathers,
the air of his countenance was languid and melancholy: that he looked
like a gentleman and man of fashion, but not like a hero or conqueror.
Hence they formed their conclusions that the enterprize was above the
pitch of his mind; and that his heart was not great enough for the
sphere in which he moved. When Charles came to the palace, he
dismounted, and walked along the piazza, towards the apartment of the
Duke of Hamilton. When he was near the door, which stood open to receive
him, a gentleman stepped out of the crowd, drew his sword, and raising
his arm aloft, walked up stairs before Charles. The person who enlisted
himself in this manner, was James Hepburn of Keith, whose name will be
mentioned again more than once....

The Highlanders, when they entered the town in the morning, had secured
the Heralds and Pursuivants: at midday they surrounded the Cross with a
body of armed men, and obliged the Heralds to proclaim King James, to
read the Commission of Regency, and the Declaration, dated at Rome, in
December 1743, with a Manifesto in the name of Charles Prince Regent,
dated at Paris, 16th of May, 1745. An immense multitude witnessed this
ceremony, which was performed at noon. The populace of a great city, who
huzza for any thing that brings them together, huzzaed; and a number of
ladies in the windows strained their voices with acclamation, and their
arms with waving white handkerchiefs in honour of the day. These
demonstrations of joy, amongst people of condition, were chiefly
confined to one sex; few gentlemen were to be seen on the streets, or in
the windows; and even amongst the inferior people, many shewed their
dislike by a stubborn silence.


FOOTNOTES:

[87] On September 17.




E. THE BATTLE OF PRESTONPANS (SEPTEMBER).

    +Source.+--_Memorials of John Murray of Broughton, sometime
    Secretary to Prince Charles Edward_, 1740-1747, p. 198. Edited by
    Robert Fitzroy Bell. (Edinburgh: Scottish Historical Society, 1898.)


On thursday the 19th, in the evening, the Chevalier had certain
intelligence that G^ll Cope had marched that morning from Dunbar, and
was to encamp that night at Haddingtown, upon which he immediately gave
orders for the guards of the City to retire early next morning, and he
went himself that night to Duddingston....

In obedience to the orders given on the morning of the twentieth the
guards retired from the City and joined the army at Duddingston, and
brought alongst with them some surgeons, with whom the army was then
very ill provided, and some coaches and chaises were likewise ordered
for the conveniency of the wounded, so certain was the prospect of a
battle, and even a successful one. Thus all things being prepared about
nine in the morning, after receiving an exact account of the number of
the enemy taken at Haddington, the Chevalier put himself at the head of
his small army, drawing his sword, said with a very determined
countenance, Gentlemen, I have flung away the scabbard, with God's
assistance I don't doubt of making you a free and happy people, Mr. Cope
shall not escape us as he did in the Highlands, and then began his
march, ordering the few horse, he then had, not above fifty in number,
to advance at some small distance in front, and to detach a few to
discover the enemy's march. In this manner, with the Camerons in front,
he marched in good order, crossing Musselburgh bridge by Pinky park
wall. By this time the party of horse sent intelligence that G^ll Cope
was nigh to Tranent, from which the Chevalier conjectured that he would
engage him on the muir to the west ward of that village, and therefore
quickened his march to prevent his gaining the brow of Carberry hill
before him, but before he had near reached the top of the hill he was
told that Sir John had marched to the left, and posted himself in a low
ground betwixt Preston and Seaton. This naturally led him to imagine
that he intended to avoid coming to action; and made him determine, if
possible, to attack him the same day. With this view he advanced to the
hill and drew up his army opposite to G^ll Cope, who was formed in the
low ground before mentioned in two lines, with the two regiments of
Dragoons on his wings. So soon as the Chevalier had taken a view of the
enemy he judged it impossible to attack them in the post they was then
in, having a deep ditch in their front which runs along the high road,
where he must have sustained great loss before he could pass it; but
being determined that at no rate the enemy should give him the slip a
second time, he ordered a detachment to take possession of the Church
yard which commanded their camp on the left, and as that seemed the only
side where it was possible to come at them, he enquired if there was
none in the army acquainted with the country to know if the ground would
allow him to attack them on the left. There happened to be a gentleman
in the army of that county, who told him that there was only one pass on
the left whereby not guarded he could come to them, upon which he
ordered it to be reconnoitred, and finding it neglected he ordered a
detachment of 500 men to be posted upon the high road to the west of
Preston to prevent the enemys retiring by that road to Edinburgh, and
recalling the detachment from the Church yard he marched his army
eastward by the town of Tranent, and drew up in one line opposite to the
flank of the enemy, who upon that motion made a half wheel to face him,
expecting, as it was imagined, that he then designed to attack them, and
which L. G. M--y[88] proposed, as the Highlanders were then full of
spirits, and above all things desirous to engage; but the night being
then far advanced, the Chevalier thought it better to delay coming to an
engagement till next morning, not knowing what might be the consequence
of a rencounter in the night should the enemy, if beat, rally and come
upon him while in confusion and not able to get his people together,
knowing how difficult it was to keep irregular troops together in a body
after an action, so resolved to delay it till early next morning, and
ordered his army to halt upon the ground about three or four hundred
yards from the enemy, and to continue under arms to be ready to march
upon a minutes warning.

They accordingly lay close in order of battle the whole night without
the least whisper or noise to be heard, while G^ll Cope made some fires
in his camp and threw a few shells, which did no hurt. Having continued
in this position for some time, he was informed that the detachment of
five hundred Atholl men which he had posted upon the west side of the
village of Preston had rejoined the army; this made him very uneasy
least the enemy had filed off during the night by that road and had
taken possession of the City of Edin^r, to prevent which and to
intercept the runaways had enduced him to make that disposition. He at
first seemed resolved to make them return, but when he reflected that
their march, if discovered by the enemy, might induce them to believe it
was the whole army, and occasion them to alter their disposition or
occasion any confusion or distrust amongst his own people, he judged it
safer and better to put up with the disappointment and continue the rest
of his plan, tho he could not help complaining that his orders had been
neglected in so material a point.

Notwithstanding this _faux pas_, he kept in very high spirits the rest
of the night, laying on the ground without any covering but his plaid,
and in the morning, about an hour before daylight, made his army, guided
by the gentleman above mentioned, march from the left in three columns,
making the left of the first line the right of the army for the attack,
which motion, tho perhaps irregular, was yet necessary, and executed
with so much order and silence that the small body of horse posted in
the rear knew nothing of their march; the officer on duty, either
through forgetfulness or that he thought they could be of no service,
neglected to give them orders to march. In this order he marched to the
enemy, passing a deep bog with out the least observation. The right,
composed of the M^cdon^ds of Glengarry and Clanronald, was commanded by
the D. of P.,[89] and the left, commanded by L.G.M.,[90] which had made
the right the preceding day, consisted of the Camerons and Steuarts of
Appin. The third column, which was made up of the Atholl men, was
commanded by My L[ord] N[airn]. So soon as the two first columns had
passed the bog, they formed and marched straight to the enemy, who by
this time had formed and presented themselves in the same order of
battle they had appeared the day before. By this time the third column
had likewise passed and formed themselves about four score yards in the
rear of the first line; rather too near, if the ground would have
allowed of a more regular disposition. The left, when pretty near the
enemy, finding themselves outwinged, made a motion to front the
artillery, which occasioned a gap in the centre, but marching up
briskly, they received one fire of the cannon, which did little hurt,
and then receiving a fire from the foot, they gave a loud huzza,
returning the fire, upon which Gairdner's dragoons run off, and the
Highlanders, throwing away their muskets, attacked the foot with
incredible impetuosity, who immediately gave ground. Upon the left of
the enemy the resistance, if such behaviour merits the name, was much
less, for before the D. of P. was within three score yards of them,
Hamilton's dragoons began to reel and run off before they could receive
his fire; the foot likewise fired too soon, and almost all turned their
backs before the Highlanders could engage them with their swords. In a
few minutes the rout was total; the dragoons on the right run off by the
high road through the town of Preston, and those on the left by the
shore towards the east; the few of the foot that saved themselves
escaped by Preston Park, the wall of which had been broke down the day
before by G^ll Cope's orders. All the baggage of the army was placed in
a yard upon the left of their army, guarded by two companies of L.
Lowdon's regiment, where so soon as the action was over, Cap^t Bazil
Cochran of Coll. Lees[91] was sent by L.G.M. to tell them that if they
would immediately surrender as prisoners of war they should be used as
such, if not, they would be immediately attacked and no quarter given,
upon which they readily gave up their arms.


FOOTNOTES:

[88] Lord George Murray.

[89] Duke of Perth.

[90] Lord George Murray.

[91] Lee's Regiment, the 44th, now the Essex Regiment.




F. "JOHNNIE COPE."[92]

    +Source.+--_The Jacobite Songs and Ballads of Scotland from 1688 to
    1746_, p. 181. Edited by Charles Mackay, LL.D. [London and Glasgow:
    1861.]


    SIR JOHN COPE trode the north right far,
    Yet ne'er a rebel he cam naur,
    Until he landed at Dunbar,
        Right early in the morning.
            Hey, Johnnie Cope, are ye wauking yet?
            Or are ye sleeping, I would wit?
            O haste ye, get up, for the drums do beat:
                O fye, Cope, rise in the morning!

    He wrote a challenge from Dunbar,
    "Come fight me, Charlie, an ye daur;
    If it be not by the chance of war,
        I'll give you a merry morning."
            Hey, Johnnie Cope, etc.

    When Charlie look'd the letter upon,
    He drew his sword the scabbard from,
    "So heaven restore me to my own,
        I'll meet you, Cope, in the morning."
            Hey, Johnnie Cope, etc.

    Cope swore with many a bloody word,
    That he would fight them gun and sword;
    But he fled frae his nest like a weel-scar'd bird,
        And Johnnie he took wing in the morning.
            Hey, Johnnie Cope, etc.

    It was upon an afternoon,
    Sir John march'd into Preston town,
    He says, "My lads, come lean you down,
        And we'll fight the boys in the morning."
            Hey, Johnnie Cope, etc.

    But when he saw the Highland lads
    Wi' tartan trews and white cockades,
    Wi' swords and guns, and rungs[93] and gauds,[94]
        O Johnnie took wing in the morning.
            Hey, Johnnie Cope, etc.

    On the morrow when he did rise,
    He look'd between him and the skies;
    He saw them wi' their naked thighs,
        Which fear'd him in the morning.
            Hey, Johnnie Cope, etc.

    O then he fled into Dunbar,
    Crying for a man of war;
    He thought to have pass'd for a rustic tar,
        And gotten awa in the morning.
            Hey, Johnnie Cope, etc.

    Sir John then into Berwick rade,
    Just as the deil had been his guide;
    Gi'en him the world, he wadna staid
        T' have foughten the boys in the morning.
            Hey, Johnnie Cope, etc.

    Said the Berwickers unto Sir John,
    "O what's become of all your men?"
    "In faith," says he, "I dinna ken;
        I left them a' this morning."
            Hey, Johnnie Cope, etc.

    Says Lord Mark Kerr, "Ye are na blate,[95]
    To bring us the news o your ain[96] defeat,
    I think you deserve the back o' the gate;
        Get out o' my sight this morning."
            Hey, Johnnie Cope, etc.


FOOTNOTES:

[92] Written after the Battle of Prestonpans.

[93] Cudgels.

[94] Rods.

[95] Bashful.

[96] Own.




G. INVASION OF ENGLAND (NOVEMBER-DECEMBER).

    +Source.+--_Memorial: Lochgary to Glengary_, printed as a postscript
    to W. B. Blaikie's _Itinerary of Prince Charles Edward Stuart from
    his Landing in Scotland, July, 1745, to his Departure in September,
    1746_, p. 116. (Edinburgh: Scottish Historical Society, 1897.)


About the beginning of Nov^r the Prince called a council o' war, wherein
H.R.H. determined to march into England with the forces he then had, and
not to wait those who were coming up, but ordered them to follow.

We marched on without halt till we came to Brampton, near Carlile, where
the Prince rested with part o' the army, and order'd the siege of
Carlile, which surrender'd after four days' siege. The next day after
the surrender, the Prince enter'd the town with his whole army, where
H.R.H. remain'd some days. From thence he march'd straight with his
whole army till he arrived at Darby, where he rested two days; and
H.R.H. called a council o' war, and finding most of the private people
of the army's opinion to be rather to retreat than goe forward (tho' at
the same time H.R.H.'s opinion and inclination was to goe forward), he
agreed to a retreat. Consequently, we began our retreat next day.[97]
Lord George Murray, who always had the rear, chose our regiment for the
rearguard, tho' it was not our turn. When we came to Kendal, we had
accounts of the enemy's being close in our rear; and our regiment's
having the rearguard, and likewise the charge of the artillery. The
Prince marched on with the army till they arrived at Penrith, and the
weather very terrible, the rear could not reach Chap[98] that night,
which is halfway twixt Penrith and Kendal. Lord George took up our
quarters in a little villiage, where we rested that night on our arms,
without thro'ing a stitch of cloaths,[99] as we were sure the enemy was
very near us. Next day we marched by daylight, and for want of proper
horses the artillery was very fashious,[100] and a last load with cannon
shot happening to break on the road, upon Lord George's giving a hearty
dram to the men, they carried, some one, some two, some three of the
shot, with all their arms and acuterments. All this day some of the
enemy's horse were in our rear, but made no attack. This night we came
to Chap, and after placing our guards and sentinelles, Lord George, the
other gentlemen, and I, took up our quarters about 8 o'clock at
night.... By the break o' day Lord George order'd to beat to arms, and
order'd the artillery on before. We marched on, expecting every minut
the enemy wou'd be up with us, having none with us but your regiment and
about one hundred and twenty of Roy Stuart's regiment. About halfway to
Penrith, we saw at some distance, to the number of about 5 or 600 horse,
whom we took to be part of our own army; but upon coming near us they
made a form to attack us. These were militia sent to intercept our
march; but by a detachment we sent to attack them giving them a smart
fire, which kill'd two or three of them, they were routed, and fled, so
we march'd on untill we came to Clifton, within two short miles of
Penrith, where the Prince and his army lay. Here Lord George got account
that some of the enemy were come to the house of Lowtherhall, about a
mile's distance on our left. He desired me to ask the men (as he knew
they were fatigued) if they were willing to attack that house. They
answer'd me that they were most willing. Upon which we marched and
surrounded the house, and only found in it one officer, with a footman
of the Duke of Cumberland's, whom he had sent before to take up quarters
for him. Upon our return to Clifton, we perceived the enemy to the
number of about 3000 horse, advanced by this time within 1/4 of a mile
of Clifton. Cluny and his M^cPhersons, to about the number of three
hundred men, happened to be at this village. Lord George ordered them on
one post on the side of the road, and our regiment on another on the
other side. It was then about nightset, when the enemy, being all horse,
dismounted--I can't condescend on their number, being then dark--and
attack'd the M^cPhersons, who received them, and after a close fire for
some time on both sides, the enemy were repulsed. Upon this they sent a
stronger body to attack us both, which came directly up to us, and it
being then quite dark, they coming very close to us, we only heard the
noise of their boots, and could plainly discern their yellow belts. We
first received their full fire, which did us little damage. We
immediately gave them ours, and then attacked them sword in hand, and
oblidged them to retreat with a considerable loss.

Lord George then marched with us and the M^cPhersons into the town,
where we found the whole army ready to march for Carlisle, so that we
had neither time to refresh ourselves, or men. So you may judge our
condition, having marched t[w]o days without resting from Kendal to
Penrith, which is long 20 miles, and, without halt, 16 more on to
Carlisle, all without any sleep and very little provision; yet we brot
all the artillery safe, and lost very few men at the attack at Clifton.
I received a small wound there myself in the knee, and no other
gentleman touched. We stay'd two days at Carlisle. The third day in the
morning by break o' day we marched, expecting surely to meet Cumberland
that day to give him battle; but perceiving no enemy, march'd forward,
and that night crossed the Esk. H.R.H. continued on his march without
any remarkable occurencies till he arrived safe with his army at
Glasgow.


FOOTNOTES:

[97] December 6, "Black Friday."

[98] Shap.

[99] _I.e._, without undressing.

[100] Troublesome.




H. THE BATTLE OF FALKIRK (JANUARY, 1746).

    +Source.+--_The Lockhart Papers: containing ... also Journals and
    Memoirs of the Young Pretender's Expedition in 1745, by Highland
    Officers in his Army_, vol. ii., p. 499. (London: 1817.)


On the sixth of January we marched from Glasgow to Cumbernauld and from
thence to Falkirk. Next day orders were sent to the army at Perth to
join us and with the artillery to invest Stirling Castle. After staying
about a week, four of our six Highland regiments which were in England
were ordered to march to Linlithgow under night, both to levy the
publick money and carry off the provisions which had been ordered to be
provided for the English army now convened about Edinburgh under the
command of General Hawley who was advancing towards us.... The Duke of
Perth commanded the siege of Stirling Castle, the Prince's headquarters
being at Bannockburn near Falkirk....

General Hawley (who had been joined by the Argyleshire Highlanders to
the number of about twelve hundred under General Campbell) with the
Government's troops encamped a little northwest from the toun of
Falkirk. The P. finding General Hawley did not move from his camp at
Falkirk to attack him, held a council of war, January the seventeenth,
about midday, wherein it was resolved to march and attack Hawley.
Accordingly we set out in two columns, and under the cover of the Tor
wood passed the water of Carron at Dunipace; moving on very quickly to
gain the hill above and lying on the south west of Falkirk our two
columns kept at an equal distance of about two hundred paces till we
came in sight of the enemy about a mile and a half distant from us. At
the same time that we began our march Lord John Drummond with most of
the horse had gone to reconnoitre the enemy, and made a movement as if
he intended to march by the high way through the Tor wood close up to
them, and this might occasion what some accounts tell us of General
Hawley's perceiving a body of the Highlanders in the Tor wood, took this
appearance to be our whole army, and finding they did not advance,
allowed his troops to dine in their camp.

But to return to our main body; whilst we were making up towards the
hill above Falkirk (as was said) the enemy at last perceived us and
immediately their three regiments of dragoons were ordered up to gain
the ground upon us and hinder our forming till their foot should form
and their cannon be brought up the hill to support them. The P. seeing
the intention of the enemy, ordered 1500 or 2000 of his Highlanders,
led on by Lord George Murray and Lochiel, to advance and drive the
dragoons from the eminence they had possessed, till the main body of our
men should come up, and to form the right of our army. This attack upon
the dragoons was very quick and regular; as we came within pistolshot
the dragoons made up to us at a full trot, thinking to bear us down by
their weight, and break us at once, and indeed being well mounted and
accoutred they made a glorious show, sufficient to have struck other
hearts than ours with a pannick. We received them, however, with a very
smart fire, upon which they reeled and broke into several divisions,
some falling back upon their own foot on the left, others flying out of
the field, whilst one body of them fled off to the right betwixt the
front lines of both armies, which by this time were formed.... As the
enemy's dragoons rode off to their right betwixt the lines, our men ran
eagerly in pursuit of them, but were much surprised to find themselves
stopped by our generals and officers, who with difficulty restrained
them with their drawn swords and cocked pistols, conjuring them to
return to their ground or they would be undone. As the dragoons in their
flight betwixt the lines passed by our left wing they could not forbear
giving them part of their fire likewise. Our left had not been fully
formed when the attack begun on the right; a considerable body of the
enemy's horse came up also to attack them, but receiving part of the
fire of our left they broke and run off; their infantry coming in upon
that side were opposed by some of our battalions, who receiving the
enemy's fire went in amongst them sword in hand and drove them down the
hill with great impetuosity and slaughter, but not being in sight of our
right (by reason of the unevenness of the ground) they made a halt till
such time as the two wings should join in the centre and the second line
come up. His R. H., whose attention was turned to all quarters observing
that our left wing was outlined by the enemy, sent Brigadier Stapleton
with the pickets of the Irish Brigade and some other battalions from the
second line, which extended our first line and recovered the disorder
we were like to be put into. Then our whole army marched down towards
the enemy, who were retreating on all sides in great disorder, but by
reason of the unevenness of the ground and night coming on with a storm
of wind and rain they could not overtake them, as they were positively
ordered to keep their ranks. The enemy, finding they could neither
possess nor save their camp, set fire to their tents and retreated with
great precipitation towards Linlithgow, and were just got to the east
end of the toun of Falkirk when Lord John Drummond entered it on that
side, Lord George Murray in the middle, and Lochiel in the west end of
the toun. We took most of their cannon, ammunition, and baggage which
they had not themselves destroyed. We reckoned about seven hundred of
the enemy taken prisoners and about six hundred men and between thirty
or forty officers killed. We had not above forty men killed on our side,
amongst whom were two or three captains and some subaltern officers.




I. RETREAT TO THE NORTH (FEBRUARY TO APRIL, 1746).

    +Source.+--_The Lyon in Mourning: or, a Collection of Speeches,
    Letters, Journals, etc., relative to the Affairs of Prince Charles
    Edward Stuart_, vol. i., p. 83, by the Rev. Robert Forbes, A.M.,
    Bishop of Ross and Caithness, 1746-1775. Edited from his manuscript,
    with a preface by Henry Paton, M.A. (Edinburgh: Scottish Historical
    Society, 1895.)


_Journal by MR. JOHN CAMERON, Presbyterian Preacher and Chaplain at
Fort-William._

The retreat from Stirling was made with the utmost hurry and confusion.
The evening before, Mr. O'Sullivan wrote from Bannockburn to Lord John
Drummond ordering him to leave Stirling and cross the Forth by break of
day, which order his lordship obeyed, and by 5 in the morning marched.
This surprized the Highlanders, to whose officers it appears these
orders were not communicate, and made them believe the enemy was near
them, which occasioned such an universal consternation that they went
from Stirling as everyone was ready, and left most of their baggage, all
the cloaths they brought from Glasgow, and some of their arms.

Lochiel, who had been wounded at Falkirk, not being able to ride or
walk, went in a chaise with Mrs. Murray, and was driving through St.
Ninian's when the church blew up. Some of the stones came very near
them. The horses startled and threw Mrs. Murray on the street, where she
lay speechless till she was taken up by some of the men. Had there been
any intention to blow up the church, doubtless Lochiel, one of their
principal officers, and the Secretary's lady had been apprized of it and
put on their guard to avoid danger.

When the Prince join'd the body of the army a Council of War was held,
in which it was debated whether the army should march in a body to
Inverness by Aberdeen or take the Highland road, by which the chiefs
could, with the greater ease, get such of their men to rejoin them as
had gone home with plunder after the battle of Falkirk, which would
considerably increase their army. The low-country men were of the former
opinion, the Highlanders of the latter. It was put to the vote, and the
latter carried it by a great majority. However, the Prince was positive
for the Aberdeen road, with which Lochiel complied. But Cluny, going
out, met Mr. Murray, and told him it was surprizing the Prince should be
so positive in a thing contrary to reason and his own instinct,
especially when a great majority of the Council of War were of another
opinion. His expressing himself with a little warmth made Mr. Murray
speak to Sir Thomas Sheridan, who went to the Prince and prevailed upon
him to agree with what had been the opinion of the Council of War. He
marched with the Highlanders the Highland road by Ruthven in Badenoch,
to Inverness, where it was resolved to attack Fort Augustus and Fort
William. Of either I can give no distinct account, but that the first
was taken, and the siege of the other deserted.

Earl Cromertie and others were sent to different countries to cover the
rising of some and prevent that of others. This weakened the army, and
tho' many joined the day before the battle of Culloden, a great number
did not. Earl of Cromertie, tho' many expresses were sent to order his
returning to Inverness, in place of doing as commanded, was surprized
and taken prisoner; and these that did join were much fatigued. None had
got pay after they left Tay bridge in their march north, and they were
straightened in provisions for some days before the battle. Cumberland's
army was not opposed in passing the Spey, tho' a considerable force had
been sent there for that end.[101] The Prince was in danger of being
taken at MacIntosh's house, and his safety was chiefly owing to a
mistake of Earl of Loudon's men.


FOOTNOTES:

[101] This is incorrect.




J. THE EVE OF CULLODEN (APRIL, 1746).

    +Source.+--_Memoirs of Sir Robert Strange, Knight, and of his
    Brother-in-Law, Andrew Lumisden, Private Secretary to the Stuart
    Princes_, vol. i., p. 54, by James Dennistoun, of Dennistoun.
    (London: 1855.)


Such was the position of my undertaking[102] when, all of a sudden, news
was brought to Inverness that the Duke of Cumberland, with his army, had
passed the Spey on the 13th of April. The town was in a general alarm,
and even in confusion. Nothing was heard but the noise of bagpipes, the
beating of drums, and the clash of arms. The field of Culloden was the
following day to be the general rendezvous, and every individual betook
himself to his corps.

The army was now mustering upon the field, it being the 14th; but
unfortunately we had not been joined by a considerable number of our
men, who were actually upon their march from different parts of the
country, and would have been up in the course of a few days. The whole
of the Macphersons, a considerable body of the Frasers, some few of the
Macintoshes, in general all the Mackenzies, and several other bodies of
men who had been raised in the more northern counties, had all received
repeated expresses, and were hastening to join the army. In this
situation, divested as it were of part of our numbers, we hourly
expected the Duke. He had come on to Nairn on the 14th, and was there
halting. There was even no appearance of his moving, the 15th being his
birthday. In the afternoon of that day, the Prince had summoned a
council of war to be held upon the field, and had proposed a plan of a
march under cloud of night, to attack the Duke's army by surprise, and
to force his camp. This plan was worthy even of any of the greatest
heroes of antiquity, and met with general approbation, particularly
amongst the clans. The council remained long in deliberating in what
manner it was to be conducted. Two essential things, secrecy and
expedition, were the great objects to be observed. There was only one
road to Nairn, which was the high road; and this being covered in many
places with villages, it was essential to avoid it, to prevent any
information being carried to the Duke's army. The next alternative, and
indeed the only one, was to attempt a way along the foot of a ridge of
mountains which fronted the sea, but had scarcely ever been trod by
human foot, and was known by the name of the Moor-road. It would have
brought us in upon that part of the enemy's camp from which they could
apprehend no danger. It lengthened indeed the road, which, in the
sequel, and from the shortness of the night, proved our misfortune.

Before the council broke up, every regiment as it were had his place
assigned him in the order of the march. The van was commanded by Lord
George Murray, who, with about one-third of the army, was to have passed
the water of Nairn about two miles distant from the town, and who,
unexpected by the enemy, was to have invested the Duke's quarters, and
to have made him prisoner. The remaining two-thirds, commanded by the
Duke of Perth and Lord John Drummond, were to have attacked them from
the plain, which, in all probability, would have been carried sword in
hand. It is to be remarked that the same army had been already surprised
at Falkirk.

Night coming on--and not sooner could the army begin its march, to
prevent the country people from being alarmed, or any intelligence being
carried to the enemy,--part of our numbers, weak as we were, was under a
necessity of being left on the field, in order to save appearances, and
light up fires, as had been done the preceding evening, and to prevent
stragglers, if any there were, forming unnecessary conjectures. The
night was favourable to our wishes, but alas! such a road was never
travelled; the men in general were frequently up to the ankles, and the
horses in many places extricated themselves with difficulty. In this
manner were we retarded almost the whole of the night; notwithstanding
of which, an uncommon spirit supported itself throughout the army.

It was now the 16th of April, when day began to break about four in the
morning. It was indeed a dreadful knell to us, being as yet above four
long miles from Nairn; nor did we know what sort of road we had yet to
encounter. Appearances became serious, each was whispering to his
neighbour, and, so far as countenances could be descried, disappointment
was evidently marked. During this critical moment of suspense, what was
to be done? A halt took place; a council was called as soon as the
general officers could be got together. The morning was fine, and the
day was ushering in apace; it required but little time to deliberate,
and finding it impossible to attack the Duke by surprise, it was judged
expedient, for the safety of the army, to give up the enterprise, and
return to the field of Culloden. Thus were our hopes disappointed. We
saw, as it were before us, the glorious prize; but we durst not
encounter it, for there is almost a moral certainty that we should have
been cut off to a man. The enemy was early in motion, must have seen us
at a considerable distance, and received us upon the points of their
bayonets.


FOOTNOTES:

[102] Strange, an expert engraver, was printing Jacobite bank-notes.




K. THE BATTLE.

    +Source.+--_Idem._, p. 60.


Let us for an instant review the situation of this army.[103] They had,
for many weeks before the battle, been reduced to a short allowance of
bread; when I say bread, I mean oatmeal, for they had no other. Must not
this have enfeebled their bodies? Their treasury-chest had been nearly
exhausted: they had received but little money: of course considerable
arrears were owing them. They had passed the 14th and following night
under arms upon the field of battle, every instant expecting the Duke.
Upon the night of the 15th, which was the eve of the battle, they had
performed the march I have described. Judge, then, what was to be
expected from such an army, worn out with fatigue, and at this moment
short of the common necessaries of life, and outnumbered upwards of two
to one by their enemies; for the Duke's army consisted of at least
eleven thousand men; that of the Prince did not exceed six, of which we
shall find at least a thousand during the action were asleep in Culloden
parks. What, then, can justify the deliberate folly and madness of
fighting under such circumstances? But our time was come. We were at
variance within ourselves: Irish intriguers and French politics were too
predominant in our councils. These gentlemen, forsooth, considered
themselves as to be but prisoners of war, whilst every other individual
were fighting with halters round their necks. General appearances upon
the field of battle were much against us. No line was as yet formed; the
men were standing in clusters; and stragglers in small numbers were
coming up from all quarters. Overpowered with fatigue, they had stopped
everywhere on the road, and were now joining the army.

It being determined to give battle to the Duke, no time was now lost in
forming the lines, and in making every proper disposition. The right of
the army, commanded by Lord George Murray, was composed of his own
regiment of Athol, the Camerons, Stuarts of Appin, one battalion of the
Frasers, and the Macintoshes. The left wing, commanded by the Duke of
Perth, consisted of the MacDonalds of Glengarry, Keppoch, and
Clanronald, two companies of MacLeans, two of MacLeods, and the
Farquharsons. The second line, commanded by Lord John Drummond and
Major-general Stapleton, consisted of the Irish pickets, the regiments
of Lord Ogilvy, Lord Lewis Gordon, Duke of Perth, and Lord John
Drummond. On the right wing, behind the second line, was a troop of
Fitz-James' horse, and on the left part of the horse-guards, Perthshire
squadron, and hussars. The regiment of Kilmarnock's foot-guards, and
Colonel John Roy Stuart, with such of the men as had no guns, formed a
sort of reserve. The Prince, attended by his aides-de-camp, and Lord
Elcho's guards, placed himself towards the centre, behind the first
line. We had six pieces of cannon; two placed on the right, two on the
left, and two in the centre of the front line.

The Duke of Cumberland drew up his army in three lines. The first,
commanded by Lieutenant-general the Earl of Albemarle, consisted of the
regiments of Burrel, Monro, Scot's Fusiliers, Price, Cholmondley and St.
Clair. The second, commanded by Major-general Huske, consisted of the
regiments of Wolfe, Ligonier, Sempill, Bligh, and Fleming. The third
line, commanded by Brigadier Mordaunt, consisted of the regiments of
Blackney, Battereau, Pultney, and Howard. On the right wing were placed
Cobham's dragoons, and the half of Kingston's horse; and on the left
Ker's dragoons, and the other half of Kingston's horse, with the
Campbells of Argyle. Ten pieces of cannon were placed in the first line,
two between each regiment, and six pieces in the second line.

The enemy formed at a considerable distance, and marched on in order of
battle, outlining us both on the right and on the left. About one
o'clock the cannonading began; and the Duke's artillery, being well
served, could not fail of doing execution. One of the Prince's grooms,
who led a sumpter horse, was killed upon the spot; some of the guards
were wounded, as were several of the horse. One Austin, a very worthy,
pleasant fellow, stood on my left; he rode a fine mare, which he was
accustomed to call his lady. He perceived her give a sudden shrink, and,
on looking around him, called out, "Alas! I have lost my lady!" One of
her hind legs was shot, and hanging by the skin. He that instant
dismounted, and, endeavouring to push her out of the ranks, she came to
the ground. He took his gun and pistols out of the holsters, stepped
forward, joined the foot, but was never more heard of. The Prince,
observing this disagreeable position, and without answering any end
whatever, ordered us down to a covered way, which was a little towards
our right, and where we were less annoyed with the Duke's cannon; he
himself, with his aides-de-camp, rode along the line towards the right,
animating the soldiers. The guards had scarce been a minute or two in
this position, when the small arms began from the Duke's army, and kept
up a constant fire; that instant, as it were, one of the aides-de-camp
returned, and desired us to join the Prince. We met him in endeavouring
to rally the soldiers, who, annoyed with the enemy's fire, were
beginning to quit the field. The right of our army, commanded by Lord
George Murray, had made a furious attack, cut their way through Burrel's
and Monro's regiments, and had taken possession of two pieces of cannon;
but a reinforcement of Wolfe's[104] regiment, etc., coming up from the
Duke's second line, our right wing was obliged to give way, being at the
same time flanked with some pieces of artillery, which did great
execution. Towards the left the attack had been less vigorous than on
the right, and of course had made but little impression on the Duke's
army; nor was it indeed general, for the centre, which had been much
galled by the enemy's artillery, almost instantly quitted the field.

The scene of confusion was now great; nor can the imagination figure it.
The men in general were betaking themselves precipitately to flight; nor
was there any possibility of their being rallied. Horror and dismay was
painted in every countenance. It now became time to provide for the
Prince's safety: his person had been abundantly exposed. He was got off
the field, and very narrowly escaped falling in with a body of horse,
which had been detached from the Duke's left, were advancing with an
incredible rapidity, picking up the stragglers, and, as they gave no
quarter, were levelling them with the ground. The greater numbers of the
army were already out of danger, the flight having been so precipitate.
We got upon a rising ground, where we turned round and made a general
halt. The scene was, indeed, tremendous. Never was so total a rout--a
more thorough discomfiture of an army. The adjacent country was in a
manner covered with its ruins. The whole was over in about twenty-five
minutes. The Duke's artillery kept still playing, though not a soul upon
the field. His army was kept together, all but the horse. The great
pursuit was upon the road towards Inverness. Of towards six thousand
men, which the Prince's army at this period consisted of, about one
thousand were asleep in Culloden parks, who knew nothing of the action
till awaked by the noise of the cannon. These in general endeavoured to
save themselves by taking the road towards Inverness; and most of them
fell a sacrifice to the victors, for this road was in general strewed
with dead bodies. The Prince at this moment had his cheeks bedewed with
tears; what must not his feeling heart have suffered?


FOOTNOTES:

[103] The Jacobite one.

[104] The hero of Quebec.




L. THE PRINCE A FUGITIVE (APRIL-MAY 1746).

    +Source.+--_The Lyon in Mourning: or, a Collection of Speeches,
    Letters, Journals, etc., relative to the Affairs of Prince Charles
    Edward Stuart_, vol. i., p. 367, by the Rev. Robert Forbes, A.M.,
    Bishop of Ross and Caithness, 1746-1775. Edited from his manuscript,
    with a preface by Henry Paton, M.A. (Edinburgh: Scottish Historical
    Society, 1895.)


_Copy of CAPTAIN O'NEILLE'S Journal, taken from an attested copy by his
name subscribed with his own hand._

That night[105] the Prince retir'd six miles from the field of battle
and went next day as far, and in three days more arrived at Fort
Augustus, where he remained a whole day in expectation his troops would
have join'd him. But seeing no appearance of it, he went to the house of
Invergary and ordered me to remain there to direct such as pass'd that
way the road he took. I remained there two days and announc'd the
Prince's orders to such as I met, but to no effect, every one taking his
own road.

I then followed the Prince, who was so far from making a precipitate
retreat [as has been maliciously reported] that he retired by six and
six miles and arrived the 28th of April O.S. at Knoidart, where I join'd
him next day and gave him an account of the little or no appearance
there was of assembling his troops, upon which he wrote circular letters
to all the chieftains, enjoining them, by the obedience they owed him,
to join him immediately with such of their clans as they could gather;
at the same time representing to them the imminent danger they were in
if they neglected it. After remaining some days there in hopes his
orders would have been obeyed, and seeing not one person repair to him,
the extreme danger his person was in, being within seven miles of Lord
Loudon, Sir Alexander MacDonald and the MacLeods, it was proposed to
evade it by retreating to one of the islands near the continent. After
repeated instances of the like nature he reluctantly assented, leaving
Mr. John Hay behind to transmit him the answers of his letters, with an
account of what should pass, and parted for the Isles in an open fishing
boat at eight at night, attended by Colonel O'Sullivan and me only.
About an hour after we parted a violent hurricane arose, which drove us
ninety miles[106] from our designed port; and next day running for
shelter into the Island of North Uist,[107] we struck upon a rock and
staved to pieces, and with great difficulty saved our lives. At our
landing we were in the most melancholy situation, knowing nobody and
wanting the common necessaries of life. After much search we found a
little hut uninhabited, and took shelter there, and with a great deal of
pains made a fire to dry our cloaths. Here the Prince remained two days,
having no other provisions but a few biskets we had saved out of the
boat, which were entirely spoiled with the salt water.

As this island belonged to Sir Alexander MacDonald, and not judging
ourselves safe, we determined going elsewhere, and by the greatest good
fortune, one of our boatmen discovered a boat stranded on the coast, and
having with great difficulty launched it into the water, we embarked for
the Harris. In our passage we unfortunately met with another storm which
obliged us to put into an island near Stornoway.... And meeting with
three ships of war we were constrained to put into a desert island where
we remained eight days in the greatest misery, having no sustenance but
some dried fish that Providence threw in our way in this island. When
the ships disappeared we put to sea again, and next morning met with
another ship of war just coming out of one of the lochs, who pursued us
for near an hour; but the wind rising we made our escape. In the
afternoon we arrived at the Island of Benbecula.... Here we remained
some days longer, till the Duke of Cumberland having intelligence that
the Prince was concealed in the Long Isle, ordered the militia of the
Isle of Sky and the Independent Companies to go in search of him. As
soon as we had notice of their landing we retreated to an island about
twelve miles distance, called Ouya, where we remained till we found they
had followed us, and then we went for Loch Boisdale, and stayed there
eight days, when Captain Carolina Scott landed within a mile of us,
which obliged us to separate, the Prince taking me to the mountains, and
O'Sullivan remaining with the boatmen.


FOOTNOTES:

[105] April 16.

[106] A vast exaggeration.

[107] Should be Benbecula.




M. FLORA MACDONALD (JUNE, 1746).

    +Source.+--_The Lyon in Mourning: or, a Collection of Speeches,
    Letters, Journals, etc., relative to the Affairs of Prince Charles
    Edward Stuart_, vol. i., p, 296, by the Rev. Robert Forbes, A.M.,
    Bishop of Ross and Caithness, 1746-1775. Edited from his manuscript,
    with a preface by Henry Paton, M.A. (Edinburgh: Scottish Historical
    Society, 1895.)


_Journal taken from the mouth of MISS FLORA MACDONALD by DR. BURTON of
York, when in Edinburgh._

Miss MacDonald had gone from Sky to Milton in South Uist in order to
visit her brother-german, who had about that time taken up house. She
had not been long there till Captain O'Neil (by some lucky accident or
other) had become acquainted with her. When the Prince was surrounded
with difficulties on all hands, and knew not well what to do for his
future safety, Captain O'Neil brought Miss MacDonald to the place where
the Prince was, and there they concerted the plan. At that time Miss
returned to Milton. After Miss MacDonald had (with some difficulty)
agreed to undertake the dangerous enterprize, she set out for
Clanranald's house, Saturday, June 21st, and at one of the fords was
taken prisoner by a party of militia, she not having a passport. She
demanded to whom they belonged? And finding by the answer that her
step-father was then commander, she refused to give any answers till she
should see their captain. So she and her servant, Neil MacKechan, were
prisoners all that night.

Her stepfather, coming next day, being Sunday, she told him what she was
about, upon which he granted a passport for herself, a manservant (Neil
MacKechan), and another woman, Bettie Burk, a good spinster, and whom he
recommended as such in a letter to his wife at Armadale in Sky, as she
had much lint to spin. If her stepfather (Hugh MacDonald of Armadale)
had not granted Miss a passport, she could not have undertaken her
journey and voyage. Armadale set his stepdaughter at liberty, who
immediately made the best of her way to Clanranald's house and
acquainted the Lady Clanranald with the scheme, who supplied the Prince
with apparel sufficient for his disguise, viz. a flower'd linen gown, a
white apron, etc., and sent some provisions along with him.

During Miss MacDonald's stay at Clanranald's house, which was till the
Friday, June 27th, O'Neil went several times betwixt the Prince and
Miss, in which interval another scheme was proposed, that the Prince
should go under the care of a gentleman to the north ward, but that
failing them, they behoved to have recourse to that agreed upon before;
and accordingly Lady Clanranald, one Mrs. MacDonald, O'Neil, Miss Flora
MacDonald, and her servant, Neil MacKechan, went to the place where the
Prince was, being about eight Scotch miles. He was then in a very little
house or hut, assisting in the roasting of his dinner, which consisted
of the heart, liver, kidneys, etc., of a bullock or sheep, upon a wooden
spit. O'Neil introduced his young preserver and the company, and she sat
on the Prince's right hand and Lady Clanranald on his left. Here all
dined very heartily....

When all were gone who were not to accompany the Prince in his voyage to
the Isle of Sky, Miss MacDonald desired him to dress himself in his new
attire, which was soon done, and at a proper time they removed their
quarters and went near the water with their boat afloat, nigh at hand
for readiness to embark in case of an alarm from the shore. Here they
arrived, very wet and wearied, and made a fire upon a rock to keep them
somewhat warm till night. They were soon greatly alarmed by seeing four
wherries full of armed men making towards shore, which made them
extinguish their fire quickly, and to conceal themselves among the
heath....

At eight o'clock, June 28th, Saturday, 1746, the Prince, Miss Flora
MacDonald, Neil MacKechan, etc., set sail in a very clear evening from
Benbecula to the Isle of Sky. It is worth observing here that Benbecula
is commonly reckoned a part of South Uist, they being divided from one
another by the sea only at high water, which then makes a short ferry
betwixt the two; but at low water people walk over upon the sand from
the one to the other.

They had not rowed from the shore above a league till the sea became
rough, and at last tempestuous, and to entertain the company the Prince
sung several songs and seemed to be in good spirits.

In the passage Miss MacDonald fell asleep, and then the Prince carefully
guarded her, lest in the darkness any of the men should chance to step
upon her. She awaked in a surprise with some little bustle in the boat,
and wondered what was the matter, etc....

From hence they rowed on and landed at Kilbride, in Troternish, in the
Isle of Sky, about twelve miles north from the above-mentioned point.
There were also several parties of militia in the neighbourhood of
Kilbride. Miss left the Prince in the boat and went with her servant,
Neil MacKechan, to Mougstot, Sir Alexander MacDonald's house, and
desired one of the servants to let Lady Margaret MacDonald know she was
come to see her ladyship in her way to her mother's house. Lady Margaret
knew her errand well enough by one Mrs. MacDonald, who had gone a little
before to apprize her of it.

As Mr. Alexander MacDonald of Kingsburgh was accidentally there, Lady
Margaret desired him to conduct the Prince to his house; for it is to be
remarked that Lady Margaret did not see the Prince in any shape.
Kingsburgh sent a boy down to the boat with instructions whither to
conduct the Prince about a mile, and he (Kingsburgh) would be there
ready to conduct him. Then Kingsburgh took some wine, etc., to refresh
the Prince with, and set forwards for the place of rendezvous, leaving
Miss MacDonald with Lady Margaret at Mougstot, where the commanding
officer of the parties in search of the Prince was, and who asked Miss
whence she came, whither she was going, what news? etc., all which Miss
answered as she thought most proper, and so as to prevent any discovery
of what she had been engaged in.

Lady MacDonald pressed Miss very much in presence of the officer to
stay, telling her that she had promised to make some stay the first time
she should happen to come there. But Miss desired to be excused at that
time, because she wanted to see her mother, and to be at home in these
troublesome times. Lady Margaret at last let her go, and she and Mrs.
MacDonald above mentioned set forwards with Neil MacKechan and said Mrs.
MacDonald's maid and her man-servant. They overtook the Prince and
Kingsburgh. Mrs. MacDonald was very desirous to see the Prince's
countenance; but as he went along he always turned away his face from
Mrs. MacDonald to the opposite side whenever he perceived her
endeavouring to stare him in the countenance. But yet she got several
opportunities of seeing his face, though in disguise, which the maid
could not help taking notice of, and said she had never seen such an
impudent-looked woman, and durst say she was either an Irish woman or
else a man in a woman's dress. Miss MacDonald replied she was an Irish
woman, for she had seen her before. The maid also took notice of the
Prince's awkward way of managing the petticoats, and what long strides
he took in walking along, etc., which obliged Miss MacDonald to desire
Mrs. MacDonald (they being both on horseback), to step a little faster
and leave those on foot, because, as there were many parties of militia
in the great roads, it was necessary for the Prince to cross the
country, and it was not proper to let Mrs. MacDonald's man or maid
servant see it. So on they went, and the Prince and Kingsburgh went over
the hills and travelled south-south-east till they arrived at
Kingsburgh's house, which was about twelve o'clock at night, and they
were very wet....

The day was far advanced before he[108] set out, and when he arrived at
a wood side (as the affair had been concerted), not far from
Kingsburgh, he changed his apparel once more and put on the Highland
dress Kingsburgh had furnished him with. Then Kingsburgh sent a guide
with him to Portree, thro' all byways, while Miss MacDonald went thither
on horseback by another road, thereby the better to gain intelligence
and at the same time to prevent a discovery. They were very wet, it
having rained very much. Here he only dried his clothes, took some
little refreshment, and staid about two hours.

Hither Kingsburgh had sent to prepare a boat, and to have it ready to
convey the Prince to the place where he wanted to be at, not allowing
the people about Portree in the meantime to know anything about the
person's being the Prince whom they were to receive and to take care of.
Young MacLeod of Raaza came with Malcolm MacLeod to conduct the Prince
over to the Island of Raaza. The Prince was very uneasy he had not a
MacDonald to conduct him still. He left Portree on Tuesday, the 1st of
July, and landed that very same day at a place called Glam in Raaza.

Miss MacDonald took leave of the Prince at Portree, and from thence went
to her mother, after a fatiguing journey cross the country. She never
told her mother, or indeed anybody else, what she had done.


FOOTNOTES:

[108] The Prince.




N. CHARLES AT CLUNY'S "CAGE" (SEPTEMBER, 1746).

    +Source.+--_The History of the Rebellion in the year 1745_, Appendix
    No. xlvi., p. 377, by John Home, Esq. (London: 1802.)


_Cluny's account of Locheil and himself after the Battle of Culloden: of
their meeting with Charles; and the extraordinary habitation called the
Cage, where Charles lived with them, till he received notice that two
French frigates were arrived at Lochnanuagh._

After the fatal catastrophe of the Highland army at Culloden, upon the
16th of April, 1746, they meant to make head again about Cluchnicarry,
till, upon Lord Loudon's approach with an army, the few that had got
together were made to disperse. Locheil being then bad of his wounds,
was obliged to shift from his own country to the Braes of Rannoch, near
which, about the 20th of June, in a hill called Benouchk, Cluny
Macpherson met him, and Sir Stuart Threipland, physician, who attended
him for the cure of his wounds. Cluny brought them from thence to
Benalder, a hill of great circumference in that part of Badenoch next to
Rannoch, and his own ordinary grassings;[109] where they remained
together, without ever getting any certain notice of what had become of
the Prince for near three months, when they received the agreeable news
of his being safe at Locharkaik....

The Prince lay the first night at Corineuir, after his coming to
Badenoch, from which he was conducted next day to Mellanauir, a shealing
of very narrow compass, where Locheil, with Macpherson of Breakachie,
Allan Cameron, his principal servant, and two servants of Cluny were at
the time. It cannot but be remarked, that, when Locheil saw five men
approaching under arms, being the Prince, Lochgary, Dr. Cameron, and two
servants, taking the five men to be of the army or militia, which lay
encamped not above four or five miles from them, and were probably in
search of them; as it was in vain to think of flying, Locheil at the
time being quite lame, and not in any condition to travel, much less to
run away; it was resolved that the enemy, as they judged them to be,
should be received with a general discharge of all the arms; in number
twelve firelocks and some pistols.... But the auspicious hand of
Almighty God ... prevented those within from firing at the Prince with
his four attendants; for they came at last so near that they were known
by those within.... Locheil then ushered him into his habitation, which
was indeed but a very poor one. The Prince was gay, and in better
spirits than it was possible to think he could have been, considering
the many disasters, disappointments, fatigues and difficulties, he had
undergone. His Royal Highness, with his retinue, went into the hut; and
there was more meat and drink provided for him than he expected. There
was plenty of mutton, an anker of whisky, containing twenty Scots pints,
some good beef sausages made the year before, with plenty of butter and
cheese, besides a large well cured bacon ham. Upon his entry, the Prince
took a hearty dram, which he sometimes called for thereafter, to drink
the healths of his friends. When some minced collops were dressed with
butter, in a large sauce-pan, which Locheil and Cluny always carried
about with them, being the only fire vessel they had, His Royal Highness
eat heartily, and said with a very cheerful countenance: "Now,
gentlemen, I live like a Prince:" though at the same time he was no
otherwise entertained than eating his collops out of the pan, with a
silver spoon....

The day after Clunie arrived, he thought it time to remove from
Mellanauir, and took the Prince about two miles further into Benalder,
to a little sheil called Uiskchibra, where the hut or bothie was
superlatively bad and smoky; yet His Royal Highness put up with
everything. Here he remained for two or three nights; and then removed
to a very romantic habitation, made for him by Clunie, two miles further
into Benalder, called the Cage; which was a great curiosity, and can
scarcely be described to perfection. It was situated in the face of a
very rough, high and rocky mountain, called Letternilichk, still a part
of Benalder, full of great stones and crevices, and some scattered wood
interspersed. The habitation called the Cage, in the face of that
mountain, was within a small thick bush of wood. There were first some
rows of trees laid down, in order to level a floor for the habitation;
and as the place was steep, this raised the lower side to an equal
height with the other; and these trees, in the way of joists or planks,
were levelled with earth and gravel. There were betwixt the trees,
growing naturally on their own roots, some stakes fixed in the earth,
which, with the trees, were interwoven with ropes, made of heath and
birch twigs, up to the top of the Cage, it being of a round or rather
oval shape; and the whole thatched and covered over with fog.[110] This
whole fabric hung, as it were, by a large tree, which reclined from the
one end, all along the roof to the other, and which gave it the name of
the Cage, and by chance there happened to be two stones at a small
distance from one another, in the side next the precipice, resembling
the pillars of a chimney where the fire was placed. The smoke had its
vent out here, all along the face of the rock, which was so much of the
same colour, that one could discover no difference in the clearest day.
The Cage was no larger than to contain six or seven persons; four of
whom were frequently employed playing at cards, one idle looking on, one
baking, and another firing bread and cooking. Here His Royal Highness
remained till the 13th of September, when he was informed that the
vessels for receiving and carrying him to France were arrived at
Lochnanuagh. The Prince set out immediately; and travelling only by
night, arrived at Borodale, near Lochnanuagh, on the 19th of September,
and embarked there on the 20th.


FOOTNOTES:

[109] Grazings.

[110] Moss.

       *       *       *       *       *

BILLING AND SONS, LTD., PRINTERS, GUILDFORD




_Crown 8vo. 1s. net each_

+Bell's English History Source-Books+

JOINT EDITORS

 S. E. WINBOLT, M.A., Christ's Hospital, Horsham
 KENNETH BELL, M.A., Fellow of All Souls College, Oxford

_THE FOLLOWING VOLUMES ARE READY_

+449-1066. The Welding of the Race.+ By the Rev. JOHN WALLIS, M.A.,
Christ's Hospital, Horsham.

+1066-1154. The Normans in England.+ Edited by A. E. BLAND, M.A. (Public
Record Office).

+1154-1216. The Angevins and the Charter.+ Edited by S. M. TOYNE, M.A.

+1216-1307. The Growth of Parliament and the War with Scotland.+ By W.
D. ROBIESON, University of Glasgow.

+1307-1399. War and Misrule.+ Edited by A. A. LOCKE.

+1399-1485. York and Lancaster.+ Edited by W. GARMON JONES, M.A.,
University of Liverpool.

+1485-1547. The Reformation and the Renaissance.+ Edited by F. W.
BEWSHER, B.A.

+1547-1603. The Age of Elizabeth.+ Edited by ARUNDELL ESDAILE, M.A.

+1603-1660. Puritanism and Liberty.+ Edited by KENNETH BELL, M.A.

+1660-1714. A Constitution in Making.+ Edited by G. B. PERRETT, M.A.

+1714-1760. Walpole and Chatham.+ Edited by K. A. ESDAILE.

+1760-1801. American Independence and the French Revolution.+ Edited by
S. E. WINBOLT, M.A.

+1801-1815. England and Napoleon.+ Edited by S. E. WINBOLT, M.A.

+1815-1837. Peace and Reform.+ Edited by A. C. W. EDWARDS, Christ's
Hospital, Horsham.

+1837-1856. Commercial Politics.+ By R. H. GRETTON, M.A.

+1856-1876. From Palmerston to Disraeli.+ Edited by EWING HARDING, B.A.

+1876-1887. Imperialism and Mr. Gladstone.+ Edited by R. H. GRETTON.

       *       *       *       *       *

+1535-1913. Canada.+ By JAMES MUNRO, M.A., University of Edinburgh.


+BELL'S SCOTTISH HISTORY SOURCE-BOOKS+

+1689-1746. The Jacobite Rebellions.+ By J. PRINGLE THOMSON.

+1637-1688. The Scottish Covenanters.+ By J. PRINGLE THOMSON.

_These volumes will be followed by others dealing with Scottish
History._

       *       *       *       *       *

_Now Ready. Crown 8vo. 1s. 6d. net._

+A Source Book of London History+

FROM THE EARLIEST TIMES TO 1800

By P. MEADOWS, M.A.

This book is intended for those who realize the value and importance
both of local history and of original material as giving vividness and
interest to the history lesson. It consists of a great number of
selections from contemporary sources connected together by a narrative
which traces the development of the capital from the earliest times to
the end of the eighteenth century.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Crown 8vo. With Maps and Plans. Second Edition. 2s._

+An Introduction to English Industrial History+

By HENRY ALLSOPP, B.A., Late Vice-Principal of Ruskin College, Oxford

This book attempts to make a really interesting, simple and suggestive
introduction to industrial and economic history. It is intended to
induce our young men and women of all classes to study earnestly this
important subject, which has, up to the present, been impossible,
because the text-books are too expensive or else too learned and
academic.

_Contents_: Part I. THE MANORIAL SYSTEM. Part II. TOWNS AND GUILDS. Part
III. STATE REGULATION AND THE MERCANTILE SYSTEM. Part IV. THE INDUSTRIAL
REVOLUTION.

       *       *       *       *       *

+Mediæval England+

A FRAMEWORK OF ENGLISH HISTORY

1066-1485

By S. M. TOYNE, M.A., Late Senior History Master at Haileybury College.
1_s._

It is suggested that this volume may be of considerable assistance not
only to students using the ordinary text-books, but also to those whose
work is based on some such series as Messrs. Bell's +English History
Source Books+. The author's object has been to produce a volume that
will be an aid to, and not a substitute for, reading, and it is hoped
that it may be of value as giving a summary of important events and a
review of national development.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d. net_

+The Government of Man+

AN INTRODUCTION TO ETHICS AND POLITICS

By G. S. BRETT, M.A. (Oxon.)

ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR OF PHILOSOPHY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO, FORMERLY
PROFESSOR OF PHILOSOPHY AT THE GOVERNMENT COLLEGE, LAHORE

Among the topics dealt with in this brilliant and most original study
are: Greek morality, a general view; the morality of the Cosmopolitan
Age, of the Roman Republic, and Empire; some aspects of the Middle Ages;
theory and practice, 1265-1600; the psychological problems of modern
life and the political and religious aspects of conduct.

    "The book will be found helpful to any one who takes an intelligent
    interest in the subjects which it treats. The author has read widely
    and grasped what he has read; he does not aim at originality, but he
    succeeds in being essentially fairminded, and his summary, which
    gives the kernel of many authorities, will be of real use as an
    introduction both to politics and ethics separately, but more
    particularly in their relations to each other."--_Cambridge Review._

       *       *       *       *       *

_Crown 8vo. 2s. net_

+The King's Government+

A SKETCH OF THE GROWTH OF THE CENTRAL ADMINISTRATION

By R. H. GRETTON

AUTHOR OF "A MODERN HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH PEOPLE"

A most valuable contribution to a much-neglected side of constitutional
development--that of the organs of central government, with special
emphasis on their wonderful expansion during the last one hundred years.
An invaluable book for the advanced student.

    "The volume is an excellent piece of original research work, and it
    is most usefully illustrative of the working of the
    constitution."--_Educational Times._

       *       *       *       *       *

_Second Edition. With Illustrations and Maps. 1s. 6d._

+The Highways of the World+

By A. E. McKILLIAM, M.A.

An ideal scheme in Geography and Industrial History for Upper Standards
covering the ground from the old Caravan and Trade Routes down to the
Suez and Panama Canals, the C.P. Railway, and the discoveries of the
South Pole.

       *       *       *       *       *

+A Historical Course for Middle Forms.+ By B. L. K. HENDERSON, M.A.,
D.Litt., and P. MEADOWS, M.A., Assistant Masters at Haberdashers' Aske's
School, Cricklewood. In Four Volumes. Crown 8vo. 2_s._

Vol. I. WESTERN EUROPE.

Vol. II. THE ENGLISH NATION: INDUSTRIAL AND SOCIAL HISTORY.

Vol. III (in preparation). CONSTITUTIONAL HISTORY.

Vol. IV (in preparation). POLITICAL AND GENERAL HISTORY.

Distinctive Features of this Course are:

1. The plan for providing for the four years of middle school life
between the ages of twelve and sixteen.

2. The careful adaptation of each volume to a year's school work.

3. The combination of outlines and passages from original sources.

4. The separate treatment of the important aspects of national history.

5. The employment of questions which will necessitate on the part of the
pupil reasonable exercise of comparison and judgement.


+British Church History (to A.D. 1000).+ By the Rev. W. H. FLECKER,
M.A., D.C.L., Head Master, Dean Close School, Cheltenham. 1_s._ 6_d._

In this book the author keeps the reader, throughout, in close touch
with the original authorities, such as Bede, and is careful to lay
stress on the light thrown by them on contemporary social conditions.


+Early English History from the Chronicles.+ By A. F. DODD, B.A.,
Greystoke Place Training College. 2_s._

This history covers the period from the earliest times of recorded
history to the end of the Norman epoch. Its distinguishing
characteristic is the extent to which quotations from contemporary
authorities are introduced, with the purpose of throwing light upon the
social usages, manners, and methods of thought of the Anglo-Saxons and
Normans.


+History of England.+ By JOHN LINGARD, D.D. New and cheaper revised
edition brought down to the Reign of King George V, by DOM HENRY NORBERT
BIRT, O.S.B. With a Preface by ABBOT GASQUET, D.D. With Maps. Third
Edition. Large crown 8vo. 640 pages. 3_s._ 6_d._ Or in 2 vols.: Vol. I
(to 1485), 2_s._; Vol. II (1485-1913), 2_s._

    "That Dom Norbert Birt's volume has really given us what was needed
    we have no hesitation in affirming. We believe that this book will,
    to a great extent, supersede the manuals now used in our Catholic
    schools, and make its way by its own merits into Protestant places
    of education."--_Tablet._

       *       *       *       *       *

LONDON: G. BELL AND SONS, LTD.




                    A LIST OF BOOKS

                     SELECTED FROM

                   BELL'S EDUCATIONAL
                       CATALOGUE

                     [Illustration]

                        CONTENTS

                                                  PAGE
 LATIN AND GREEK                                     2
 MATHEMATICS                                         5
 ENGLISH                                             8
 MODERN LANGUAGES                                   12
 SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY                             14
 HISTORY                                            15
 WEBSTER'S NEW INTERNATIONAL DICTIONARY             16

   +-----------------------------------------------+
   |Messrs. Bell are at all times glad to receive  |
   |visits from members of the teaching profession,|
   |and to avail themselves of the opportunity to  |
   |discuss matters of mutual interest, to submit  |
   |their latest publications, and to talk over    |
   |new methods and ideas.                         |
   +-----------------------------------------------+

            LONDON: G. BELL AND SONS, LTD.

            PORTUGAL STREET, KINGSWAY, W.C.

        CAMBRIDGE         DEIGHTON, BELL & CO.
        NEW YORK          THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
        BOMBAY            A. H. WHEELER & CO.


LATIN AND GREEK

_Full Catalogue of Classical Books sent on application_


Bell's Illustrated Classics

Edited by E. C. MARCHANT, M.A.

Edited with Introductions, Notes and Vocabularies. With illustrations,
maps and plans, 1_s._ 6_d._ each; except the GREEK PLAYS, which are
2_s._ each.

+Cæsar.+ Book I. By A. C. LIDDELL, M.A.

---- Book II. By A. C. LIDDELL, M.A.

---- Book III. By F. H. COLSON, M.A., and G. M. GWYTHER, M.A.

---- Book IV. By Rev. A. W. UPCOTT, D.D.

---- Book V. By A. REYNOLDS, M.A.

---- Books IV. and V., in one volume, 2_s._ 6_d._

---- Book VI. By J. T. PHILLIPSON, M.A.

---- Books V. and VI., in one volume, 2_s._ 6_d._

---- Book VII. By S. E. WINBOLT, M.A.

+Cæsar's Invasions of Britain+ (De Bello Gallico. Lib. IV. XX.-V.
XXIII.). By Rev. A. W. UPCOTT, D.D., and A. REYNOLDS, M.A.

+Cicero.+ Speeches against Catiline. I. and II. (1 vol.). By F. HERRING,
M.A.

---- Selections. By J. F. CHARLES, B.A.

---- De Amicitia. By H. J. L. J. MASSÉ, M.A.

---- De Senectute. By A. S. WARMAN, B.A.

+Cornelius Nepos.+ Epaminondas, Hannibal, Cato. By H. L. EARL, M.A.

+Eutropius.+ Books I. and II. (1 vol.). By J. G. SPENCER, B.A.

+Homer:+ Iliad. Book I. By L. D. WAINWRIGHT, M.A.

+Horace:+ Odes. Book I. By C. G. BOTTING, B.A.

---- Book II. By C. G. BOTTING, B.A.

---- Book III. By H. LATTER, M.A.

---- Book IV. By H. LATTER, M.A.

+Livy.+ Book IX., cc. i-xix. By W. C. FLAMSTEAD WALTERS, M.A.

---- Hannibal's First Campaign in Italy. (Selected from Book XXI.) By F.
E. A. TRAYES, M.A.

+Lucian:+ Vera Historia. By R. E. YATES, B.A.

+Ovid:+ Metamorphoses. Book I. By G. H. WELLS, M.A.

---- Selection from the Metamorphoses. By J. W. E. PEARCE, M.A.

---- Elegiac Selections. By F. COVERLEY SMITH, B.A.

---- Tristia. Book I. By A. E. ROGERS, M.A.

---- Tristia. Book III. By H. R. WOOLRYCH, M.A.

+Phaedrus:+ A Selection. By Rev. R. H. CHAMBERS, M.A.

+Stories of Great Men.+ By Rev. F. CONWAY, M.A.

+Virgil:+ Æneid. Book I. By Rev. E. H. S. ESCOTT, M.A.

---- Book II. By L. D. WAINWRIGHT, M.A.

---- Book III. By L. D. WAINWRIGHT, M.A.

---- Book IV. By A. S. WARMAN, B.A.

---- Book V. By J. T. PHILLIPSON, M.A.

---- Book VI. By J. T. PHILLIPSON, M.A.

---- Books VII., VIII., IX., X., XI., XII. By L. D. WAINWRIGHT, M.A. 6
vols.

---- Selection from Books VII. to XII. By W. G. COAST, B.A.

---- Georgics. Book IV. By L. D. WAINWRIGHT, M.A.

+Xenophon:+ Anabasis. Books I., II., III. By E. C. MARCHANT, M.A. 3
vols.


_GREEK PLAYS (2s. each)_

+Aeschylus:+ Prometheus Vinctus. By C. E. LAURENCE, M.A.

+Euripides:+ Alcestis. By E. H. BLAKENEY, M.A.

---- Bacchae. By G. M. GWYTHER, M.A.

---- Hecuba. By Rev. A. W. UPCOTT, M.A.

---- Medea. By Rev. T. NICKLIN, M.A.

---- Iphigenia in Tauris. By T. S. MORTON, M.A.


+Bell's Illustrated Classics--Intermediate Series+

Edited for higher forms, without Vocabularies. With Illustrations and
Maps.

+Cæsar:+ Seventh Campaign in Gaul, B.C. 52. De Bello Gallico. Lib. VII.
By the Rev. W. COOKWORTHY COMPTON, M.A. 2_s._ 6_d._ net.

---- De Bello Civili. Book I. By the Rev. W. J. BENSLEY, M.A. 2_s._
6_d._ net.

+Livy.+ Book XXI. Edited by F. E. A. TRAYES, M.A. 2_s._ 6_d._ net.

+Tacitus:+ Agricola. By J. W. E. PEARCE, M.A. 2_s._

+Sophocles:+ Antigone. By G. H. WELLS, M.A. 2_s._ 6_d._ net.

+Homer:+ Odyssey. Book I. By E. C. MARCHANT, M.A. 2_s._

+Athenians in Sicily.+ Being portions of Thucydides, Books VI. and VII.
By the Rev. W. COOKWORTHY COMPTON, M.A. 2_s._ 6_d._ net.


Bell's Simplified Latin Classics

Edited, with Notes, Exercises, and Vocabulary, by S. E. WINBOLT, M.A.,
Christ's Hospital, Horsham. Crown 8vo. With numerous Illustrations.
1_s._ 6_d._ each.

_FIRST LIST OF VOLUMES, NOW READY_

 +Cæsar's Invasions of Britain.+
 +Livy's Kings of Rome.+
 +Vergil's Taking of Troy.+
 +Vergil's Athletic Sports.+
 +Simple Selections from Cicero's Letters.+
 +Cæsar's Fifth Campaign+ (from De Bello Gallico, Book V.).
 +Tacitus' Agricola.+
 +Sallust's Catiline.+


Latin and Greek Class Books

+Bell's Illustrated Latin Readers.+ Edited by E. C. MARCHANT, M.A.

Pott 8vo. With brief Notes, Vocabularies, and numerous Illustrations.
1_s._ each.

+Scalae Primae.+ A Selection of Simple Stories for Translation into
English.

+Scalae Mediae.+ Short Extracts from Eutropius and Caesar.

+Scalae Tertiae.+ Selections in Prose and Verse from Phaedrus, Ovid,
Nepos and Cicero.

       *       *       *       *       *

+Latin Picture Cards.+ Edited by Prof. FRANK S. GRANGER, M.A. Sixteen
cards printed in colours, with Vocabularies and Exercises. 1_s._ 3_d._
net per set.

+Bell's Illustrated Latin Course, for the First Year.+ In three Parts.
By E. C. MARCHANT, M.A., and J. G. SPENCER, B.A. With numerous
Illustrations. 1_s._ 6_d._ each.

+Dialogues of Roman Life.+ By S. E. WINBOLT, M.A. Illustrated. With or
without Vocabulary. 2_s._

+Latin Unseens.+ Selected and arranged by E. C. MARCHANT, M.A. 1_s._

+Pōns Tīrōnum.+ A First Latin Reader. By R. B. APPLETON and W.
H. S. JONES. 1_s._

+Latin Reader+ (Verse and Prose). By W. KING GILLIES, M.A., and H. J.
ANDERSON, M.A. 2_s._

+Latin of the Empire+ (Prose and Verses.) By W. KING GILLIES, M.A., and
A. R. CUMMING, M.A. 3_s._

+First Exercises in Latin Prose Composition.+ By E. A. WELLS, M.A. With
Vocabulary. 1_s._

+Materials for Latin Prose Composition.+ By the Rev. P. FROST, M.A.
2_s._ Key, 4_s._ net.

+Passages for Translation into Latin Prose.+ By Prof. H. NETTLESHIP,
M.A. 3_s._ Key, 4_s._ 6_d._ net.

+Easy Translations+ from Nepos, Cæsar, Cicero, Livy, &c., for
Retranslation into Latin. By T. COLLINS, M.A. 2_s._

+Memorabilia Latina.+ By F. W. LEVANDER, F.R.A.S. 1_s._

+Test Questions on the Latin Language.+ By F. W. LEVANDER, F.R.A.S.
1_s._ 6_d._

+Latin Syntax Exercises.+ By L. D. WAINWRIGHT, M.A. Five Parts. 8_d._
each.

+A Latin Verse Book.+ By the Rev. P. FROST, M.A. 2_s._ Key, 5_s._ net.

+Latin Elegiac Verse+, Easy Exercises in. By the Rev. J. PENROSE. 2_s._
Key, 3_s._ 6_d._ net.

+Bell's Concise Latin Course.+ Part I. By E. C. MARCHANT, M.A., and J.
G. SPENCER, B.A. 2_s._

+Bell's Concise Latin Course.+ Part II. By E. C. MARCHANT, M.A., and S.
E. WINBOLT, M.A. 2_s._ 6_d._

+Cothurnulus.+ Three Short Latin Historical Plays. By Prof. E. V.
ARNOLD, LITT.D. With or without Vocabulary, 1_s._ Vocabulary separately,
4_d._ net.

+Easy Latin Plays.+ By M. L. NEWMAN. 6_d._

+Olim.+ Easy Latin Plays. By E. RYLE. With Vocabulary. 1_s._

+Eclogæ Latinæ;+ or, First Latin Reading Book. With Notes and Vocabulary
by the late Rev. P. FROST, M.A. 1_s._ 6_d._

+Latin Exercises and Grammar Papers.+ By T. COLLINS, M.A. 2_s._ 6_d._

+Unseen Papers+ in Latin Prose and Verse. By T. COLLINS, M.A. 2_s._
6_d._

+Foliorum Silvula.+ Part I. Passages for Translation into Latin Elegiac
and Heroic Verse. By H. A. HOLDEN, LL.D. 7_s._ 6_d._

+How to Pronounce Latin.+ By J. P. POSTGATE, LITT.D. 1_s._ net

+Res Romanae+, being brief Aids to the History, Geography, Literature
and Antiquities of Ancient Rome. By E. P. COLERIDGE, M.A. With 3 maps.
2_s._ 6_d._

+The Shorter Æneid.+ With Brief Notes by H. H. HARDY, M.A. 2_s._ 6_d._

+Climax Prote. A First Greek Reader.+ With Hints and Vocabulary. By E.
C. MARCHANT, M.A. Illustrated, 1_s._ 6_d._

+Greek Verbs.+ By J. S. BAIRD, T.C.D. 2_s._ 6_d._

+Analecta Græca Minora.+ With Notes and Dictionary. By the Rev. P.
FROST. 2_s._

+Unseen Papers+ in Greek Prose and Verse. By T. COLLINS, M.A. 3_s._

+Notes on Greek Accents.+ By the Rt. Rev. A. BARRY, D.D. 1_s._

+Res Graecae.+ Being Aids to the study of the History, Geography,
Archæology, and Literature of Ancient Athens. By E. P. COLERIDGE, M.A.
With 5 Maps, 7 Plans and 17 other illustrations. 5_s._

+Notabilia Quaedam.+ 1_s._


Other Editions, Texts, &c.

+Anthologia Latina.+ A Selection of Choice Latin Poetry, with Notes. By
Rev. F. ST. JOHN THACKERAY, M.A. 16mo. 4_s._ 6_d._

+Anthologia Graeca.+ A Selection from the Greek Poets. By Rev. F. ST.
JOHN THACKERAY, M.A. 16mo. 4_s._ 6_d._

+Aristophanis+ Comoediae. Edited by H. A. HOLDEN, LL.D. Demy 8vo. 18_s._

The Plays separately: Acharnenses, 2_s._; Equites, 1_s._ 6_d._; Vespae,
2_s._; Pax, 2_s._; Lysistrata, et Thesmophoriazusae, 4_s._; Aves, 2_s._;
Ranae, 2_s._; Plutus, 2_s._

+Catullus.+ Edited by J. P. POSTGATE, M.A., LITT.D. Fcap. 8vo. 3_s._

+Corpus Poetarum Latinorum.+ Edited by WALKER. 1 thick vol. 8vo. Cloth,
18_s._

+Mundus Alter et Idem.+ Edited as a School Reader by H. J. ANDERSON,
M.A. 2_s._

+Horace.+ The Latin Text, with Conington's Translation on opposite
pages. Pocket Edition. 4_s._ net; or in leather, 5_s._ net. Also in 2
vols., limp leather. The Odes, 2_s._ net; Satires and Epistles, 2_s._
6_d._ net.

+Livy.+ The first five Books. PRENDEVILLE'S edition revised by J. H.
FREESE, M.A. Books I., II., III., IV., V. 1_s._ 6_d._ each.

+Lucan. The Pharsalia.+ By C. E. HASKINS, M.A. With an Introduction by
W. E. HEITLAND, M.A. Demy 8vo. 14_s._

+Lucretius. Titi Lucreti Cari de rerum natura libri sex.+ Edited with
Notes, Introduction, and Translation, by the late H. A. J. MUNRO. 3
vols. 8vo. Vols. I. and II. Introduction, Text, and Notes, 18_s._ Vol.
III. Translation, 6_s._

+Ovid. The Metamorphoses.+ Book XIII. With Introduction and Notes by
Prof. C. H. KEENE, M.A. 2_s._ 6_d._

+Ovid. The Metamorphoses.+ Book XIV. With Introduction and Notes by
Prof. C. H. KEENE, M.A. 2_s._ 6_d._

⁂ Books XIII. and XIV. together. 3_s._ 6_d._

+Persius. A Persii Flacci Satirarum Liber.+ Edited, with Introduction
and Notes by A. PRETOR, M.A. 3_s._ 6_d._ net.

+Plato. The Proem to the Republic of Plato.+ (Book I. and Book II.
chaps. 1-10.) Edited, with Introduction, Critical Notes, and Commentary,
by Prof. T. G. TUCKER, LITT.D. 6_s._

+Petronii Cena Trimalchionis.+ Edited and Translated by W. D. LOWE, M.A.
7_s._ 6_d._ net.

+Propertius. Sexti Properti Carmina+ recognovit J. P. POSTGATE, LITT.D.
4to. 3_s._ net.

+Rutilius: Rutilii Claudii Namatiani de Reditu Suo Libri Duo.+ With
Introduction and Notes by Prof. C. H. KEENE, M.A., and English Verse
Translation by G. F. SAVAGE ARMSTRONG, M.A. 7_s._ 6_d._ net.

+Theocritus.+ Edited with Introduction and Notes, by R. J. CHOLMELEY,
M.A. Crown 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

+Theognis. The Elegies of Theognis and other Elegies included in the
Theognidean Sylloge.+ With Introduction, Commentary, and Appendices, by
J. HUDSON WILLIAMS, M.A. Crown 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._ net.

+Thucydides. The History of the Peloponnesian War.+ With Notes and a
Collation of the MSS. By the late R. SHILLETO, M.A. Book I. 8vo. 6_s._
6_d._ Book II. 5_s._ 6_d._


Bell's Classical Translations

Crown 8vo. Paper Covers, 1_s._ each.

+Æschylus:+ Translated by WALTER HEADLAM, LITT.D., and C. E. S. HEADLAM,
M.A. Agamemnon--The Suppliants--Choephoroe--Eumenides--Prometheus
Bound--Persians--Seven against Thebes.

+Aristophanes:+ The Acharnians. Translated by W. H. COVINGTON, B.A.

---- The Plutus. Translated by M. T. QUINN, M.A.

+Cæsar's+ Gallic War. Translated by W. A. M'DEVITTE, B.A. 2 Vols. (Books
I.-IV., and Books V.-VII.).

+Cicero:+ Friendship and Old Age. Translated by G. H. WELLS, M.A.

---- Orations. Translated by Prof. C. D. YONGE, M.A. 6 vols. Catiline,
Murena, Sulla and Archias (in one vol.), Manilian Law, Sextius, Milo.

+Demosthenes+ on the Crown. Translated by C. RANN KENNEDY.

+Euripides.+ Translated by E. P. COLERIDGE, M.A. 14 vols.
Medea--Alcestis--Heracleidæ--Hippolytus--Supplices--Troades--Ion--
Andromache--Bacchæ--Hecuba--Hercules Furens--Orestes--Iphigenia in Tauris.

+Homer's Iliad+, Books I. and II., Books III.-IV., Books V.-VI., Books
VII.-VIII., Books IX.-X., Books XI.-XII., Books XIII.-XIV., Books XV.
and XVI., Books XVII. and XVIII., Books XIX. and XX. Translated by E. H.
BLAKENEY, M.A. 10 vols.

---- Book XXIV. Translated by E. H. BLAKENEY, M.A.

+Horace.+ Translated by A. HAMILTON BRYCE, LL.D. 4 vols. Odes,
Books I. and II.--Odes, Books III. and IV., Carmen Seculare and
Epodes--Satires--Epistles and Ars Poetica.

+Livy.+ Books I., II., III., IV. Translated by J. H. FREESE, M.A. With
Maps. 4 vols.

---- Books V. and VI. Translated by E. S. WEYMOUTH, M.A.Lond. With Maps.
2 vols.

---- Book IX. Translated by FRANCIS STORR, M.A. With Map.

---- Books XXI., XXII., XXIII. Translated by J. BERNARD BAKER, M.A. 3
vols.

+Lucan:+ The Pharsalia. Book I. Translated by FREDERICK CONWAY, M.A.

+Ovid's+ Fasti. Translated by HENRY T. RILEY, M.A. 3 vols. Books I. and
II.--Books III. and IV.--Books V. and VI.

+Ovid's+ Tristia. Translated by HENRY T. RILEY, M.A.

+Plato:+ Apology of Socrates and Crito (1 vol.), Phædo, and Protagoras.
Translated by H. CARY, M.A. 3 vols.

+Plautus:+ Trinummus, Aulularia, Menæchmi, Rudens, and Captivi.
Translated by HENRY T. RILEY, M.A. 4 vols.

+Sophocles.+ Translated by E. P. COLERIDGE, M.A. 7
vols. Antigone--Philoctetes--Œdipus Rex--Œdipus
Coloneus--Electra--Trachiniæ--Ajax.

+Thucydides.+ Book VI. Translated by E. C. MARCHANT, M.A.

---- Book VII. Translated by E. C. MARCHANT, M.A.

+Virgil+, Translated by A. HAMILTON BRYCE, LL.D. 6 vols.
Bucolics--Georgics--Æneid, 1-3--Æneid, 4-6--Æneid, 7-9--Æneid, 10-12.

+Xenophon's+ Anabasis. Translated by the Rev. J. S. WATSON, M.A. With
Map. 3 vols. Books I. and II.--Books III., IV., and V.--Books VI. and
VII.

---- Hellenics. Books I. and II. Translated by the Rev. H. DALE, M.A.

⁂ _For other Translations from the Classics, see the Catalogue of
Bohn's Libraries, which will be forwarded on application_


MATHEMATICS

_Full Catalogue of Mathematical Books post free on application_


Bell's Mathematical Series

General Editor: WILLIAM P. MILNE, M.A., D.Sc.

+Arithmetic.+ By H. FREEMAN, M.A. With or without Answers, 2_s._ 6_d._
Answers, 6_d._ net.

+The Elements of Non-Euclidean Geometry.+ By D. M. Y. SOMMERVILLE, M.A.,
D.Sc. 5_s._

+Problem Papers in Arithmetic for Preparatory Schools.+ By T. COOPER
SMITH, M.A. 1_s._ 6_d._

+Statics. Part I.+ By R. C. FAWDRY, M.A. 2_s._ 6_d._

_Other volumes in active preparation._


Cambridge Mathematical Series

+Public School Arithmetic.+ By W. M. BAKER, M.A., and A. A. BOURNE, M.A.
3_s._ 6_d._ Or with Answers, 4_s._ 6_d._

+The Student's Arithmetic.+ By W. M. BAKER, M.A., and A. A. BOURNE, M.A.
With or without Answers. 2_s._ 6_d._

+Arithmetic.+ By W. M. BAKER and A. A. BOURNE. In 2 Parts, 2_s._ each,
with Answers Perforated. Examples, 2_s._

+New School Arithmetic.+ By C. PENDLEBURY, M.A., and F. E. ROBINSON,
M.A. With or without Answers. 4_s._ 6_d._ In Two Parts. 2_s._ 6_d._
each.

Key to Part II., 8_s._ 6_d._ net.

+New School Examples+ in a separate volume, 3_s._ Or in Two Parts, 1_s._
6_d._ and 2_s._

+Arithmetic+, with 8000 Examples. By C. PENDLEBURY, M.A. 4_s._ 6_d._ In
Two Parts. 2_s._ 6_d._ each. Key to Part II., 7_s._ 6_d._ net.

+Examples in Arithmetic.+ Extracted from the above. 3_s._ Or in Two
Parts 1_s._ 6_d._ and 2_s._

+Commercial Arithmetic.+ By C. PENDLEBURY, M.A., and W. S. BEARD,
F.R.G.S. 2_s._ 6_d._ Part I. separately, 1_s._ Part II., 1_s._ 6_d._

+Arithmetic for Indian Schools.+ By C. PENDLEBURY, M.A., and T. S. TAIT.
3_s._

+Examples in Arithmetic.+ By C. O. TUCKEY M.A. With or without Answers.
3_s._

+Junior Practical Mathematics.+ By W. J. _Stainer_, B.A. 2_s._, with
Answers, 2_s._ 6_d._ Part I., 1_s._ 4_d._, with Answers, 1_s._ 6_d._
Part II., 1_s._ 4_d._

+Elementary Algebra.+ By W. M. BAKER, M.A., and A. A. BOURNE, M.A. New
and Revised Edition. 4_s._ 6_d._ Also Part I., 2_s._ 6_d._, or with
Answers, 3_s._ Part II., with or without Answers, 2_s._ 6_d._ +Key+
10_s._ net; or in 2 Parts, 5_s._ net each.

+A Shorter Algebra.+ By W. M. BAKER, M.A., and A. A. BOURNE, M.A. 2_s._
6_d._

+Examples in Algebra.+ Extracted from above. With or without Answers,
3_s._ Or in Two Parts. Part I., 1_s._ 6_d._, or with Answers, 2_s._ Part
II., with or without Answers, 2_s._

+Examples in Algebra.+ By C. O. TUCKEY, M.A. With or without Answers.
3_s._

---- +Supplementary Examples.+ 6_d._ net.

+Elementary Algebra for use in Indian Schools.+ By J. T. HATHORNTHWAITE,
M.A. 2_s._

+Choice and Chance.+ By W. A. WHITWORTH, M.A. 7_s._ 6_d._

---- +DCC Exercises+, including Hints for the Solution of all the
Questions in "Choice and Chance." 6_s._

+Euclid.+ Books I.-VI., and part of Book XI. By HORACE DEIGHTON, M.A.
4_s._ 6_d._, or in separate books.

+Introduction to Euclid.+ By HORACE DEIGHTON, M.A., and O. EMTAGE, B.A.
1_s._ 6_d._

+Euclid.+ Exercises on Euclid and in Modern Geometry. By J. MCDOWELL,
M.A. 6_s._

+Elementary Graphs.+ By W. M. BAKER, M.A., and A. A. BOURNE, M.A. 6_d._
net.

+A New Geometry.+ By W. M. BAKER, M.A., and A. A. BOURNE, M.A. Crown
8vo. 2_s._ 6_d._ Also Books I.-III. separately, 1_s._ 6_d._

+Elementary Geometry.+ By W. M. BAKER, M.A., and A. A. BOURNE, M.A.
4_s._ 6_d._ Or in Parts. Answers, 6_d._ net. Key, 6_s._ net.

+Examples in Practical Geometry and Mensuration.+ By J. W. MARSHALL,
M.A., and C. O. TUCKEY, M.A. 1_s._ 6_d._

+Geometry for Schools.+ By W. G. BORCHARDT, M.A., and the Rev. A. D.
PERROTT, M.A. Complete, 4_s._ 6_d._; also Vol. I., 1_s._; Vol. II.,
1_s._ 6_d._; Vol. III., 1_s._; Vols. I.-III., 2_s._ 6_d._; Vol. IV.,
1_s._; Vols. I.-IV., 3_s._; Vol. V., 1_s._; Vol. VI., 1_s._ 6_d._; Vols.
I.-V., 3_s._ 6_d._; Vols. IV.-V., 2_s._

+New Trigonometry for Schools.+ By W. G. BORCHARDT, M.A., and Rev. A. D.
PERROTT, M.A. 4_s._ 6_d._ Or Two Parts, 2_s._ 6_d._ each. Key, 10_s._
net; or 2 Parts, 5_s._ net each.

+First Numerical Trigonometry.+ By W. G. BORCHARDT, M.A., and the Rev.
A. D. PERROTT, M.A. 2_s._ 6_d._

+Junior Trigonometry.+ By W. G. BORCHARDT, M.A., and the Rev. A. D.
PERROTT, M.A. 3_s._ 6_d._

+Elementary Trigonometry.+ By CHARLES PENDLEBURY, M.A., F.R.A.S. 4_s._
6_d._

+Short Course of Elementary Plane Trigonometry.+ By CHARLES PENDLEBURY.
2_s._ 6_d._

+Elementary Trigonometry.+ By J. M. DYER, M.A., and the Rev. R. H.
+Whitcombe+, M.A. 4_s._ 6_d._

+Algebraic Geometry.+ By W. M. BAKER, M.A. 6_s._ Part I. (The Straight
Line and Circle), 2_s._ 6_d._ Key, 7_s._ 6_d._ net.

+Practical Solid Geometry.+ By the Rev. PERCY UNWIN, M.A. 4_s._ 6_d._

+Analytical Geometry for Beginners.+ By Rev. T. G. VYVYAN, M.A. Part I.
The Straight Line and Circle. 2_s._ 6_d._

+Conic Sections+, treated Geometrically. By W. H. BESANT, Sc.D., F.R.S.
4_s._ 6_d._ Key, 5_s._ net.

+Elementary Conics+, being the first 8 chapters of the above. 2_s._
6_d._

+Conics, the Elementary Geometry of.+ By Rev. C. TAYLOR, D.D. 5_s._

+Calculus for Beginners.+ By W. M. BAKER, M.A. 3_s._

+Differential Calculus for Beginners.+ By A. LODGE, M.A. With
Introduction by Sir OLIVER LODGE. 4_s._ 6_d._

+Integral Calculus for Beginners.+ By A. LODGE, M.A. 4_s._ 6_d._

+Roulettes and Glissettes.+ By W. H. BESANT. Sc.D., F.R.S. 5_s._

+Geometrical Optics.+ An Elementary Treatise by W. S. ALDIS, M.A. 4_s._

+Practical Mathematics.+ By H. A. STERN, M.A., and W. H. TOPHAM. 6_s._;
or Part I., 2_s._ 6_d._; Part II., 3_s._ 6_d._

+Elementary Hydrostatics.+ By W. H. BESANT, Sc.D. 4_s._ 6_d._ Solutions,
5_s._ net.

+Elements of Hydrostatics.+ By C. M. JESSOP, M.A., and G. W. CAUNT, M.A.
2_s._ 6_d._

+Elementary Mechanics.+ By C. M. JESSOP, M.A., and J. H. HAVELOCK, M.A.,
D.Sc. 4_s._ 6_d._

+Experimental Mechanics for Schools.+ By FRED CHARLES, M.A., and W. H.
HEWITT, B.A., B.Sc. 3_s._ 6_d._

+The Student's Dynamics.+ Comprising Statics and Kinetics. By G. M.
MINCHIN, M.A., F.R.S. 3_s._ 6_d._

+Elementary Dynamics.+ By W. M. BAKER, M.A. New Revised Edition, 4_s._
6_d._ Key, 10_s._ 6_d._ net.

+Elementary Dynamics.+ By W. GARNETT, M.A., D.C.L. 6_s._

+Dynamics+, A Treatise on. By W. H. BESANT, Sc.D., F.R.S. 10_s._ 6_d._

+Heat+, An Elementary Treatise on. By W. GARNETT, M.A., D.C.L. 4_s._
6_d._

+Elementary Physics+, Examples and Examination Papers in. By W.
GALLATLY, M.A. 4_s._

+Mechanics+, A Collection of Problems in Elementary. By W. WALTON, M.A.
6_s._

_Uniform Volume_

+Geometrical Drawing.+ For Army and other Examinations. By R. HARRIS.
3_s._ 6_d._


The Junior Cambridge Mathematical Series.

+A Junior Arithmetic.+ By C. PENDLEBURY, M.A., and F. E. ROBINSON, M.A.
1_s._ 6_d._ With Answers, 2_s._

+Examples from a Junior Arithmetic.+ Extracted from the above. 1_s._
With Answers, 1_s._ 6_d._

+A First Algebra.+ By W. M. Baker, M.A., and A. A. BOURNE, M.A. 1_s._
6_d._; or with Answers, 2_s._

+A First Geometry.+ By W. M. BAKER, M.A., and A. A. BOURNE, M.A. With or
without Answers, 1_s._ 6_d._

+Elementary Mensuration.+ By W. M. BAKER, M.A., and A. A. BOURNE, M.A.
1_s._ 6_d._


Other Mathematical Works

+The Mathematical Gazette.+ Edited by W. J. GREENSTREET, M.A. (Jan.,
March, May, July, Oct. and Dec.) 1_s._ 6_d._ net.

+The Teaching of Elementary Mathematics+, being the Reports of the
Committee of the Mathematical Association. 6_d._ net.

+The Teaching of Elementary Algebra and Numerical Trigonometry.+ Being
the Report of the Mathl. Assoc. Committee, 1911. 3_d._ net.

+A New Shilling Arithmetic.+ By C. PENDLEBURY, M.A., and F. E. ROBINSON,
M.A. 1_s._; or with Answers, 1_s._ 4_d._

+A Shilling Arithmetic.+ By CHARLES PENDLEBURY, M.A., and W. S. BEARD,
F.R.G.S. 1_s._ With Answers, 1_s._ 4_d._

+Elementary Arithmetic.+ By CHARLES PENDLEBURY, M.A. With or without
Answers, 1_s._ 6_d._

+A Preparatory Arithmetic.+ By CHARLES PENDLEBURY, M.A. With or without
Answers, 1_s._ 6_d._

+Mental Arithmetic for Juniors.+ By S. GIBSON, 1_s._

+Bell's Indoor and Outdoor Experimental Arithmetic.+ By H. H. GOODACRE,
F.R.G.S. Parts I.-III., paper, 3_d._ each, cloth, 4_d._ each; Parts IV.
and V., paper, 4_d._ each, cloth, 6_d._ each. Teachers' Book, 3_s._
6_d._ net.

+Pendlebury's New Concrete Arithmetic.+ Parts I., II., and III., paper,
3_d._ each, cloth, 4_d._ each; Parts IV. and V., paper, 5_d._ each,
cloth, 6_d._ Answers, 3_d._ net each Part.

+Graduated Arithmetic+, for Junior and Private Schools. By the same
Authors. Parts I., II., and III., 3_d._ each; Parts IV., V., and VI.,
4_d._ each; Part VII., 6_d._

Answers to Parts I. and II., 4_d._ net; Parts III.-VII., 4_d._ net each.

+Arithmetic for the Standards+ (Scheme B). Standard I., sewed, 2_d._,
cloth, 3_d._; II., III., IV., and V., sewed, 3_d._ each, cloth, 4_d._
each; VI., and VII., sewed, 4_d._ each, cloth, 6_d._ each. Answers to
each Standard, 4_d._ net each.

+Exercises and Examination Papers in Arithmetic, Logarithms and
Mensuration.+ By C. PENDLEBURY, M.A. 2_s._ 6_d._ New Edition.

+Test Cards in Arithmetic+ (Scheme B). By C. PENDLEBURY, M.A. For
Standards II., III., IV., V., VI. and VII. 1_s._ net each.

+Public School Examination Papers in Mathematics.+ Compiled by P. A.
OPENSHAW, B.A. 1_s._ 6_d._

+Bell's New Practical Arithmetic.+ By W. J. STAINER, M.A. 1st, 2nd, 3rd,
4th, 5th and 6th Years, paper, 3_d._ each, cloth, 4_d._ each; 7th Year,
paper, 4_d._, cloth, 6_d._ Teachers' Books, 8_d._ net each Year.

+Bell's New Practical Arithmetic Test Cards+, for the 2nd, 3rd, 4th,
5th, 6th, and 7th years, 1_s._ 3_d._ net each.

+Graduated Exercises in Addition+ (Simple and Compound). By W. S. BEARD.
1_s._

+Algebra for Elementary Schools.+ By W. M. BAKER, M.A., and A. A.
BOURNE, M.A. Three stages, 6_d._ each. Cloth, 8_d._ each. Answers, 4_s._
net each.

+A First Year's Course in Geometry and Physics.+ By ERNEST YOUNG, M.A.,
B.Sc. 2_s._ 6_d._ Parts I. and II. 1_s._ 6_d._; or Part III. 1_s._

+Trigonometry+, Examination Papers in. By G. H. WARD, M.A. 2_s._ 6_d._
Key, 5_s._ net.

+Euclid, The Elements of.+ The Enunciations and Figures. By the late J.
BRASSE, D.D. 1_s._ Without the Figures, 6_d._

+Hydromechanics.+ By W. H. BESANT, Sc.D., and A. S. RAMSEY, M.A. Part
I., Hydrostatics. 7_s._ 6_d._ net. Part II., Hydrodynamics. By A. S.
RAMSEY, M.A. 10_s._ 6_d._ net.

+Hydrodynamics and Sound.+ An Elementary Treatise on. By A. B. BASSET,
M.A., F.R.S. 8_s._

+The Geometry of Surfaces.+ By A. B. BASSET, M.A., F.R.S. 10_s._ 6_d._

+Elementary Treatise on Cubic and Quartic Curves.+ By A. B. BASSET,
M.A., F.R.S. 10_s._ 6_d._

+Analytical Geometry.+ By Rev. T. G. VYVYAN, M.A. 4_s._ 6_d._


Book-keeping

+Book-keeping by Double Entry+, Theoretical, Practical, and for
Examination Purposes. By J. T. MEDHURST, A.K.C., F.S.S. 1_s._ 6_d._

+Book-keeping+, Examination Papers in. Compiled by JOHN T. MEDHURST,
A.K.C., F.S.S. 3_s._ Key, 2_s._ 6_d._ net.

+Book-keeping+, Graduated Exercises and Examination Papers in. Compiled
by P. MURRAY. F.S.S.S., F.Sc.S. (Lond.). 2_s._ 6_d._

+Text-Book of the Principles and Practice of Book-keeping and
Estate-Office Work.+ By Prof. A. W. THOMSON, B.Sc. 5_s._


ENGLISH

_Full Catalogue of English Books post free on application._

+Mason's New English Grammars.+ Revised by A. J. ASHTON, M.A.

 A Junior English Grammar, 1_s._
 Intermediate English Grammar. 2_s._
 Senior English Grammar. 3_s._ 6_d._

Works by C. P. MASON, B.A., F.C.P.

+First Notions of Grammar for Young Learners.+ 1_s._

+First Steps in English Grammar, for Junior Classes.+ 1_s._

+Outlines of English Grammar, for the Use of Junior Classes.+ 2_s._

+English Grammar+; including the principles of Grammatical Analysis.
3_s._ 6_d._

+A Shorter English Grammar.+ 3_s._ 6_d._

+Practice and Help in the Analysis of Sentences.+ 2_s._

+English Grammar Practice.+ 1_s._

       *       *       *       *       *

+A First English Grammar.+ By the Rev. J. E. W. WALLIS. 1_s._

+Elementary English Grammar through Composition.+ By J. D. ROSE, M.A.
1_s._

+Advanced English Grammar through Composition.+ By JOHN D. ROSE, M.A.
2_s._ 6_d._

+Aids to the Writing of English Composition.+ By F. W. BEWSHER, B.A.
1_s._ net.

+Exercises in English.+ By F. W. BEWSHER, B.A. 1_s._ net.

+A Practical Course in English.+ By E. J. BALLEY, B.A. 1_s._ 6_d._

+Preparatory English Grammar.+ By W. BENSON, M.A. New Edition, 1_s._
net.

+Rudiments of English Grammar and Analysis.+ By ERNEST ADAMS, PH.D.
1_s._

+The Paraphrase of Poetry.+ By EDMUND CANDLER. 1_s._

+Essays and Essay-Writing, for Public Examinations.+ By A. W. READY,
B.A. 3_s._ 6_d._

+Précis and Précis-Writing.+ By A. W. READY, B.A. 3_s._ 6_d._ Or without
Key, 2_s._ 6_d._

+Matriculation Précis.+ By S. E. WINBOLT, M.A. 1_s._ net. Key, 6_d._
net.

+Elements of the English Language.+ By ERNEST ADAMS, PH.D. Revised by J.
F. DAVIS, M.A., D.LIT. 4_s._ 6_d._

+History of the English Language.+ By Prof. T. R. LOUNSBURY. 5_s._ net.

+The Teaching of English Literature in the Secondary School.+ By R. S.
BATE, M.A. 2_s._ 6_d._ net.

+An Outline History of English Literature.+ By W. H. HUDSON. 2_s._ 6_d._
net.

+Representative Extracts from English Literature.+ By W. H. HUDSON.
2_s._ 6_d._ net.

+Ten Brink's Early English Literature.+ 3 vols. 3_s._ 6_d._ each.

+Introduction to English Literature.+ By HENRY S. PANCOAST. 5_s._ net.

+A First View of English Literature.+ By HENRY S. PANCOAST and PERCY VAN
DYKE SHELLY. Crown 8vo. 5_s._ net.

+Introduction to American Literature.+ By H. S. PANCOAST. 4_s._ 6_d._
net.

+The Foreign Debt of English Literature.+ By T. G. TUCKER, LITT.D. Post
8vo. 6_s._ net.

+Handbooks of English Literature.+ Edited by Prof. HALES. 3_s._ 6_d._
net each.

    The Age of Alfred. (660-1154). By F. J. SNELL, M.A.

    The Age of Chaucer. (1346-1400.) By F. J. SNELL, M.A.

    The Age of Transition. (1400-1580.) By F. J. SNELL, M.A. 2 vols.

    The Age of Shakespeare. (1579-1631.) By THOMAS SECCOMBE and J. W.
    ALLEN. 2 vols. Vol. I. Poetry and Prose. Vol. II. Drama.

    The Age of Milton. (1632-1660.) By the Rev. J. H. B. MASTERMAN,
    M.A., with Introduction, etc., by J. BASS MULLINGER, M.A.

    The Age of Dryden. (1660-1700.) By R. GARNETT, LL.D., C.B.

    The Age of Pope. (1700-1744.) By JOHN DENNIS.

    The Age of Johnson. (1744-1798.) By THOMAS SECCOMBE.

    The Age of Wordsworth. (1798-1832.) By Prof. C. H. HERFORD, LITT.D.

    The Age of Tennyson. (1830-1870.) By Prof. HUGH WALKER.

+Notes on Shakespeare's Plays.+ By T. DUFF BARNETT, B.A. 1_s._ each.

    Midsummer Night's Dream.--Julius Cæsar.--The
    Tempest.--Macbeth.--Henry V.--Hamlet.--Merchant of Venice.--King
    Richard II.--King John.--King Richard III.--King
    Lear.--Coriolanus.--Twelfth Night.--As You Like It.--Much Ado About
    Nothing.

+Principles of English Verse.+ By C. M. LEWIS. 5_s._ net.

+Introduction to Poetry.+ By RAYMOND M. ALDEN. 5_s._

+General Intelligence Papers.+ With Exercises in English Composition. By
G. BLUNT. 2_s._ 6_d._


Bell's English Texts for Secondary Schools

Edited by A. GUTHKELCH, M.A.

+Browning's The Pied Piper, and other Poems.+ Edited by A. GUTHKELCH.
8_d._

+Fairy Poetry.+ Selected and edited by R. S. BATE, M.A. 1_s._

+Hawthorne's Wonder Book and Tanglewood Tales.+ Selected and Edited by
H. HAMPSHIRE, M.A. 1_s._

+Kingsley's Heroes.+ Edited by L. H. POND, B.A. With 2 maps. 1_s._

+Lamb's Tales from Shakespeare.+ Selected and edited by R. S. BATE, M.A.
10_d._

+Lamb's Adventures of Ulysses.+ Selections. Edited by A. C. DUNSTAN,
PH.D. 8_d._

+Stories of King Arthur, from Malory and Tennyson.+ Edited by R. S.
BATE, M.A. 1_s._

+The Story of Enid, from Tennyson and The Mabinogion.+ By H. A. TREBLE,
M.A. 10_d._

+Scott's A Legend of Montrose.+ Abridged and edited by F. C. LUCKHURST.
1_s._

+Charles Reade's The Cloister and the Hearth.+ Abridged and edited by
the Rev. A. E. HALL, B.A. 1_s._

+Coleridge's The Ancient Mariner;+ and +Selected Old English Ballads.+
Edited by A. GUTHKELCH, M.A. 1_s._

+Hakluyt's Voyages.+ A Selection edited by the Rev. A. E. HALL, B.A.
1_s._

+Selections from Boswell's Life of Johnson.+ Edited by E. A. J. MARSH.
1_s._

+Selections from Ruskin.+ Edited by H. HAMPSHIRE, M.A. 1_s._

+Lockhart's Life of Scott.+ Selections edited by A. BARTER, LL.A. 1_s._

+Charles Lamb's Selected Essays and Letters.+ Edited by A. GUTHKELCH,
M.A. With Map of London. 1_s._ 4_d._

+Selections from Carlyle.+ Edited by ELIZABETH LEE. 1_s._

+English Odes.+ Edited by E. A. J. MARSH, M.A. 1_s._


Bell's English Classics

+Bacon's Essays.+ (Selected.) Edited by A. E. ROBERTS, M.A. 1_s._

+Browning, Selections from.+ Edited by F. RYLAND, M.A. 1_s._ 6_d._

---- +Strafford.+ Edited by E. H. HICKEY. 1_s._ 6_d._

+Burke's Conciliation with America.+ By Prof. J. MORRISON, 1_s._ 6_d._

+Burke's Letters on a Regicide Peace.+ I. and II. Edited by H. G. KEENE,
M.A., C.I.E. 1_s._ 6_d._

+Butler's Sermons (Selections).+ Edited by the Rev. W. R. MATTHEWS, M.A.
1_s._ 6_d._

+Byron's Siege of Corinth.+ Edited by P. HORDERN. 1_s._

+Byron's Childe Harold.+ Edited by H. G. KEENE, M.A., C.I.E. 2_s._ Also
Cantos I. and II., sewed, 1_s._ Cantos III. and IV., sewed, 1_s._

+Carlyle's Hero as Man of Letters.+ Edited by MARK HUNTER, M.A. 1_s._
6_d._

---- +Hero as Divinity.+ By MARK HUNTER, M.A. 1_s._ 6_d._

+Chaucer's Minor Poems, Selections from.+ Edited by J. B. BILDERBECK,
M.A. 1_s._ 6_d._

+De Quincey's Revolt of the Tartars and the English Mail-Coach.+ Edited
by CECIL M. BARROW, M.A., and MARK HUNTER, M.A. 2_s._

⁂ Revolt of the Tartars, separately. 1_s._

---- +Opium Eater.+ Edited by MARK HUNTER, M.A. 2_s._ 6_d._

+Goldsmith's Good-Natured Man+ and +She Stoops to Conquer.+ Edited by K.
DEIGHTON. Each 1_s._

⁂ The two plays together, 1_s._ 6_d._

---- +Traveller and Deserted Village.+ Edited by the Rev. A. E.
WOODWARD, M.A. Cloth, 1_s._ 6_d._, or separately, sewed, 10_d._ each.

+Irving's Sketch Book.+ Edited by R. G. OXENHAM, M.A. Sewed, 1_s._ 6_d._

+Johnson's Life of Addison.+ Edited by F. RYLAND, M.A. 1_s._

---- +Life of Pope+. Edited by F. RYLAND, M.A. 2_s._

⁂ The Lives of Swift and Pope, together, sewed, 2_s._ 6_d._

+Johnson's Life of Milton.+ Edited by F. RYLAND, M.A. 1_s._ 6_d._

---- +Life of Dryden.+ Edited by F. RYLAND, M.A. 1_s._ 6_d._

⁂ The Lives of Milton and Dryden, together, sewed, 2_s._ 6_d._

---- +Life of Swift.+ Edited by F. RYLAND, M.A. 1_s._

---- +Lives of Prior and Congreve.+ Edited by F. RYLAND, M.A. 1_s._

+Kingsley's Heroes.+ Edited by A. E. ROBERTS, M.A. Illus. 1_s._ 6_d._
Sewed, 1_s._

+Lamb's Essays.+ Selected and Edited by K. DEIGHTON. 1_s._ 6_d._

+Longfellow, Selections from, including Evangeline.+ Edited by M. T.
QUINN, M.A. 1_s._ 6_d._

⁂ Evangeline, separately, sewed, 10_d._

+Macaulay's Lays of Ancient Rome.+ Edited by P. HORDERN. 1_s._ 6_d._

---- +Essay on Clive.+ Edited by CECIL BARROW. 1_s._ 6_d._

---- +War of the Spanish Succession.+ Edited by A. W. READY. 1_s._ 6_d._

+Massinger's A New Way to Pay Old Debts.+ Edited by K. DEIGHTON. 1_s._
6_d._

+Milton's Paradise Lost.+ Books III. and IV. Edited by R. G. OXENHAM,
M.A. 1_s._; or separately, sewed, 10_d._ each.

---- +Paradise Regained.+ Edited by K. DEIGHTON. 1_s._

+Pope's Essay on Man.+ Edited by F. RYLAND, M.A. 1_s._

+Pope, Selections from.+ Edited by K. DEIGHTON. 1_s._ 6_d._

+Scott's Lady of the Lake.+ Edited by the Rev. A. E. WOODWARD, M.A.
2_s._ 6_d._ The Six Cantos separately, sewed, 6_d._ each.

+Shakespeare's Julius Cæsar.+ Edited by T. DUFF BARNETT, B.A. (Lond.).
1_s._ 6_d._

---- +Merchant of Venice.+ Edited by T. DUFF BARNETT, B.A. (Lond.).
1_s._ 6_d._

---- +Tempest.+ Edited by T. DUFF BARNETT, B.A. (Lond.). 1_s._ 6_d._

+Wordsworth's Excursion.+ Book I. Edited by M. T. QUINN, M.A. Sewed,
1_s._


Bell's Sixpenny English Texts

Edited by S. E. WINBOLT, M.A.

Bound in limp cloth, 6_d._ each.

 *+Poems by John Milton.+
 *+Spenser's 'Faerie Queene.'+ Book I.
 *+Poems by Tennyson.+
 +Selections from Byron.+
 +Macaulay's 'History of England.'+ Chapter III.[A]
 +Gibbon's 'Decline and Fall.'+ Chapters I. to III.
 +Selections from Pope.+
 +Poems by Gray and Cowper.+
 +Plutarch's Lives of Cæsar and Cicero.+
 ---- +Lives of Themistokles, Perikles, and Alkibiades.+
 *+English Elegiacs.+
 *+Selections from Chaucer.+
 +Kingsley's Heroes.+
 +Irving's Sketch Book (Selected).+
 +Macaulay's 'Lays of Ancient Rome.'+

_The volumes marked with an asterisk are also issued, interleaved, at
1s. each, bound in cloth boards._

[A] _Also issued with Notes; specially suitable for Cambridge Locals.
1s._


For Younger Pupils

 +Longfellow's Evangeline and other Poems.+
 +Selections from Hawthorne's Tanglewood Tales and Twice-told Tales.+
 +Selections from the Travels of Sir John Mandeville.+
 +Selections from Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress.+
 +Keary's Heroes of Asgard.+


English Readings. 16mo.

+Burke: Selections.+ Edited by BLISS PERRY. 2_s._ 6_d._

+Byron: Selections.+ Edited by F. I. CARPENTER. 2_s._ 6_d._

+Coleridge: Prose Selections.+ Edited by HENRY A. BEERS. 2_s._

+Dryden: Essays on the Drama.+ Edited by WILLIAM STRUNK. 2_s._

+Johnson: Prose Selections.+ Edited by C. G. OSGOOD. 2_s._

+Milton: Minor English Poems.+ Edited by MARTIN W. SAMPSON. 2_s._ 6_d._

+Swift: Prose Selections.+ Edited by FREDERICK C. PRESCOTT. 2_s._ 6_d._

+Tennyson: The Princess.+ Edited by L. A. SHERMAN. 2_s._

+Thackeray: English Humourists.+ Edited by WILLIAM LYON PHELPS. 2_s._
6_d._


Readers

+The Story of Peter Pan+ (as told in "The Peter Pan Picture Book.").
With 16 Illustrations and Songs from the Play in Tonic Solfa and Old
Notation. 9_d._

+Alice in Wonderland.+ By LEWIS CARROLL. Illustrated by ALICE B.
WOODWARD. 9_d._

+Thrift.+ A Common Sense Book for Girls. By F. FOOTE. 8_d._ net.

+York Readers.+ A new series of Literary Readers, with Coloured and
other Illustrations.

    Primer I. 3_d._ Primer II. 4_d._

    Infant Reader. 6_d._

    Introductory Reader. 8_d._

    Reader, Book I., 9_d._ Book II., 10_d._ Book III., 1_s._ Book IV.,
    1_s._ 3_d._ Book V., 1_s._ 6_d._

+York Poetry Books.+ 3 Books. Paper covers, 6_d._ each; cloth, 8_d._
each.

+Bell's Poetry Books.+ In Seven Parts. Price 3_d._ each Part, paper
covers; or 4_d._ cloth covers.

+Poetry for Upper Classes.+ Selected by E. A. HELPS. 1_s._ 6_d._


+Bell's Continuous Readers.+ Bound in Cloth. 9_d._ each.

_Suitable for Standard III._

 The Story of Peter Pan.
 The Island that Bobbed up and Down.
 The Adventures of a Donkey.
 The Life of Columbus.
 The Three Midshipmen.

_Suitable for Standard IV._

 Alice in Wonderland.
 The Water Babies.
 Parables from Nature.
 Uncle Tom's Cabin.
 Robinson Crusoe.
 Settlers in Canada.
 Children of the New Forest.

_Suitable for Standard V._

 Tom Brown's Schooldays.
 The Last of the Mohicans.
 Feats on the Fiord.
 The Little Duke.
 Masterman Ready.
 Hereward the Wake.

_Suitable for Standards VI. and VII._

 Oliver Twist.
 The Tale of Two Cities.
 Woodstock.
 Ivanhoe.
 Lamb's Tales from Shakespeare.

+Bell's Reading Books and Literature Readers.+ Strongly bound in Cloth.
Illustrated. 1_s._ each.

_Suitable for Standard III._

 Adventures of a Donkey.
 Great Deeds in English History.
 Grimm's German Tales.
 Andersen's Danish Tales.
 Great Englishmen.
 Great Irishmen.
 Life of Columbus.
 The Three Midshipmen.

_Suitable for Standard IV._

 The Story of H.M.S. Pinafore.
 Great Scotsmen.
 Uncle Tom's Cabin.
 Swiss Family Robinson.
 Great Englishwomen.
 Children of the New Forest.
 Settlers in Canada.
 Edgeworth's Tales.
 The Water Babies.
 Parables from Nature.
 Settlers at Home.

_Suitable for Standard V._

 Lyrical Poetry.
 The Story of Little Nell.
 Masterman Ready.
 Gulliver's Travels.
 Robinson Crusoe.
 Poor Jack.
 The Arabian Nights.
 The Last of the Mohicans.
 Feats on the Fiord.
 The Little Duke.
 Hereward the Wake.

_Suitable for Standards VI. and VII._

 The Talisman.
 Ivanhoe.
 Woodstock.
 Oliver Twist.
 The Vicar of Wakefield.
 Lamb's Tales from Shakespeare.
 Sir Roger de Coverley.
 Deeds that Won the Empire.
 Six to Sixteen.
 Fights for the Flag.
 The Last Days of Pompeii.
 The Tower of London.
 Esmond.
 The Fortunes of Nigel.
 Westward Ho!
 Harold.
 The Last of the Barons.

+Bell's Supplementary Readers.+ Crown 8vo. Illustrated. Limp Cloth.
6_d._ net each.

_Suitable for Standards III. and IV._

 Anderson's Danish Tales.
 Great Deeds in English History.
 Grimm's Tales.
 Adventures of a Donkey.
 Great Englishmen.
 Life of Columbus.

_Suitable for Standards IV. and V._

 Parables from Nature.
 Uncle Tom's Cabin.
 Great Englishwomen.

_Suitable for Standards V. and VI._

 Masterman Ready.
 Robinson Crusoe.
 Children of the New Forest.

_Suitable for Standards VI. and VII._

 The Talisman.
 Ivanhoe.
 Oliver Twist.
 Woodstock.

+Bell's Geographical Readers.+ By M. J. BARRINGTON-WARD, M.A.

 The Child's Geography. Illustrated. 6_d._
 The Round World. (Standard II.) 1_s._
 About England. (Stand. III.) Illus. 1_s._ 4_d._

+The Care of Babies.+ A Reading Book for Girls' Schools. Illustrated.
Cloth, 1_s._

+Bell's History Readers on the Concentric Method.+ Fully Illustrated.

 First Lessons in English History. 10_d._
 A Junior History of England. 1_s._ 6_d._
 A Senior History of England. 2_s._

+Abbey History Readers.+ Revised by the Rt. Rev. F. A. GASQUET, D.D.
Illustrated.

 Early English History (to 1066). 1_s._
 Stories from English History (1066-1485). 1_s._ 3_d._
 The Tudor Period (1485-1603). 1_s._ 3_d._
 The Stuart Period (1603-1714). 1_s._ 6_d._
 The Hanoverian Period (1714-1837). 1_s._ 6_d._

+Bell's History Readers.+ Illustrated.

 Early English History (to 1066). 1_s._
 Stories from English History (1066-1485). 1_s._ 3_d._
 The Tudor Period (1485-1603). 1_s._. 3_d._
 The Stuart Period (1603-1714). 1_s._. 6_d._
 The Hanoverian Period (1714-1837). 1_s._. 6_d._


MODERN LANGUAGES

French and German Class Books

+Bell's French Course.+ By R. P. ATHERTON, M.A. Illustrated. 2 Parts.
1_s._ 6_d._ each. Key to the Exercises, Part I., 6_d._ net; Part II.,
1_s._ net.

+Bell's First French Reader.+ By R. P. ATHERTON, M.A. Illustrated, 1_s._

+The Direct Method of Teaching French.+ By D. MACKAY, M.A., and F. J.
CURTIS, PH.D.

 +First French Book.+ 1_s._ net.
 +Second French Book.+ 1_s._ 6_d._ net.
 +Teacher's Handbook.+ 1_s._ net.
 +Subject Wall Picture+ (Coloured). 7_s._ 6_d._
 net.

+Bell's French Picture-Cards.+ Edited by H. N. ADAIR, M.A. Two Sets of
Sixteen Cards. Printed in Colours, with questionnaire on the back of
each. 1_s._ 3_d._ net each. Set III. Each card containing 3 Pictures,
Vocabulary, &c. 1_s._ 6_d._ per set.

+Bell's Illustrated French Readers.+ Pott 8vo. Fully Illustrated.

⁂ _Full List on application._

+French Historical Reader.+ By H. N. ADAIR, M.A. New Composition
Supplement, 2_s._; or without Supplement, 1_s._ 6_d._ Supplement
separately, 6_d._ net.

+Simple French Stories.+ By MARC CEPPI. Fcap. 8vo. With or without
Vocabulary and Notes. 1_s._

+Contes Français.+ Edited, with Introduction and Notes, by MARC CEPPI.
With or without Vocabulary, 1_s._ 6_d._ Handbook of Exercises and
Questionnaires, 6_d._

+Tales from Molière.+ By MARC CEPPI. Fcap. 8vo. With Vocabulary and
Notes, 2_s._ Text only, 1_s._ 6_d._

+A French Dramatic Reader.+ By MARK CEPPI. With Notes. Fcap. 8vo. 1_s._
6_d._

+Contes d'Hier et d'Aujourd'hui.+ First Series. By J. S. NORMAN, M.A.,
and CHARLES ROBERT-DUMAS. Illustrated. 1_s._ 6_d._ Second Series. 2_s._

+Le Français de France.+ By Madame VALETTE VERNET. With Illustrations.
2_s._

+Grammaire Pratique.+ Pour "Le Français de France." By Madame VALETTE
VERNET. 10_d._

+The 'Mac Munn' Differential Partnership Method of French Conversation.+
The Things About Us, and a Few Others. 2 vols. 8_d._ each.

+Stories and Anecdotes for Translation into French.+ By CARL HEATH.
1_s._

+French Sentence Expansion.+ By M. CEPPI and H. RAYMENT. 1_s._

+French Composition.+ By M. KENNEDY, M.A. Cloth, 8_d._

+A Primer of Practice on the Four French Conjugations.+ By H. M. ARTHUR.
6_d._

+Vocabulaire Français.+ French Vocabularies for Repetition. By J. P. R.
MARICHAL. 1_s._ 6_d._

+Gasc's French Course+

 +First French Book.+ 1_s._
 +Second French Book.+ 1_s._ 6_d._
 +Key to First and Second French Books.+ 1_s._ 6_d._ net.

+French Fables for Beginners.+ 1_s._

+Histoires Amusantes et Instructives.+ 1_s._

+Practical Guide to Modern French Conversation.+ 1_s._

+French Poetry for the Young.+ With Notes. 1_s._

+Materials for French Prose Composition.+ 3_s._ Key, 2_s._ net.

+Prosateurs Contemporains.+ 2_s._

+Le Petit Compagnon;+ a French Talk-Book for Little Children. 1_s._

+By the Rev. A. C. Clapin+

+French Grammar for Public Schools.+ 2_s._ 6_d._ Key, 3_s._ 6_d._ net.

+A French Primer.+ 1_s._

+Primer of French Philology.+ 1_s._

+English Passages for Translation into French.+ 2_s._ 6_d._ Key, 4_s._
net.

+A German Grammar for Public Schools.+ 2_s._ 6_d._

+A Spanish Primer.+ 1_s._

       *       *       *       *       *

+Bell's First German Course.+ By L. B. T. CHAFFEY, M.A. 2_s._

+Bell's First German Reader.+ By L. B. T. CHAFFEY, M.A. Illustrated.
2_s._

+German Historical Reader.+ By J. E. MALLIN, M.A. 2_s._

+Buddenbrook: Ein Schultag eines Realuntersekundaners.+ Edited by J. E.
MALLIN, M.A. Illustrated. 2_s._ 6_d._

+Materials for German Prose Composition.+ By Dr. C. A. BUCHHEIM. 4_s._
6_d._ A Key to Parts I. and II., 3_s._ net. Parts III. and IV., 4_s._
net.

+First Book of German Prose.+ Being Parts I. and II. of the above, with
Vocabulary. 1_s._ 6_d._

+Kurzer Leitfaden der Deutschen Dichtung.+ By A. E. COP. 2_s._ 6_d._


Gasc's French Dictionaries

+FRENCH-ENGLISH AND ENGLISH-FRENCH DICTIONARY.+ New Edition with
Supplement of New Words. Large 8vo. 12_s._ 6_d._

+CONCISE FRENCH DICTIONARY.+ Medium 16mo. 3_s._ 6_d._ Or in Two Parts.
2_s._ each.

+Pocket Dictionary of the French and English Languages.+ 16mo. 2_s._
6_d._

+Little Gem French Dictionary.+ Narrow 8vo. 1_s._ net. Limp Leather,
2_s._ net.


French and German Annotated Editions

+Bell's French Plays.+ (Based on Gombert's French Drama.) Edited by MARC
CEPPI. Paper, 6_d._; cloth, 8_d._

_First Volumes:_

 +Molière.+ Le Tartuffe.--L'Avare.--Le Misanthrope.
 +Racine.+ Les Plaideurs.
 +Voltaire.+ Zaïre.
 +Corneille.+ Le Cid.

+Gombert's French Drama.+ Re-edited, with Notes, by F. E. A. GASC.
Sewed, 6_d._ each.

 +Molière.+ Le Misanthrope.--L'Avare.--Le Bourgeois Gentilhomme.--Le
 Tartuffe.--Le Malade Imaginaire.--Les Femmes Savantes.--Les Fourberies
 de Scapin.--Les Précieuses Ridicules.--L'Ecole des Femmes.--L'Ecole des
 Maris.--Le Médecin Malgré Lui.

 +Racine.+ La Thébaïde.--Les
 Plaideurs.--Iphigénie.--Britannicus.--Phèdre.--Esther.--Athalie.

 +Corneille.+ Le Cid.--Horace.--Cinna.--Polyeucte.

 +Voltaire.+ Zaïre.

+Fénelon.+ Aventures de Télémaque. By C. J. DELILLE. 2_s._ 6_d._

+La Fontaine.+ Select Fables. By F. E. A. GASC. 1_s._ 6_d._

+Lamartine.+ Le Tailleur de Pierres de Saint-Point. By J. BOÏELLE,
B.-ès-L. 1_s._ 6_d._

+Saintine.+ Picciola. By Dr. DUBUC. 1_s._ 6_d._

+Voltaire.+ Charles XII. By L. DIREY. 1_s._ 6_d._

+German Ballads from Uhland, Goethe, and Schiller.+ By C. L. BIELEFELD.
1_s._ 6_d._

+Goethe.+ Hermann und Dorothea. By E. BELL, M.A., and E. WÖLFEL. 1_s._
6_d._

+Lessing.+ Minna von Barnhelm. By Prof. A. B. NICHOLS. 2_s._ 6_d._

+Schiller.+ Wallenstein. By Dr. BUCHHEIM. 5_s._ Or the Lager and
Piccolomini, 2_s._ 6_d._ Wallenstein's Tod, 2_s._ 6_d._

---- Maid of Orleans. By Dr. W. WAGNER. 1_s._ 6_d._

---- Maria Stuart. By V. KASTNER. 1_s._ 6_d._


Bell's Modern Translations

A Series of Translations from Modern Languages, with Memoirs,
Introductions, etc. Crown 8vo. 1_s._ each.

+Dante.+ Inferno. Translated by the Rev. H. F. CARY, M.A.

---- Purgatorio. Translated by the Rev. H. F. CARY, M.A.

---- Paradiso. Translated by the Rev. H. F. CARY, M.A.

+Goethe.+ Egmont. Translated by ANNA SWANWICK.

---- Iphigenia in Tauris. Translated by ANNA SWANWICK.

---- Goetz von Berlichingen. Translated by Sir WALTER SCOTT.

---- Hermann and Dorothea. Translated by E. A. BOWRING, C.B.

+Hauff.+ The Caravan. Translated by S. MENDEL.

---- The Inn in the Spessart. Translated by S. MENDEL.

+Lessing.+ Laokoon. Translated by E. C. BEASLEY.

---- Minna von Barnhelm. Translated by ERNEST BELL, M.A.

---- Nathan the Wise. Translated by R. DILLON BOYLAN.

+Molière.+ Translated by C. HERON WALL. 8 vols. The Misanthrope.--The
Doctor in Spite of Himself.--Tartuffe.--The Miser.--The Shopkeeper
turned Gentleman.--The Affected Ladies.--The Learned Women.--The
Impostures of Scapin.

+Racine.+ Translated by R. BRUCE BOSWELL, M.A. 5 vols.
Athalie.--Esther.--Iphigenia.--Andromache.--Britannicus.

+Schiller.+ William Tell. Translated by Sir THEODORE MARTIN, K.C.B.,
LL.D. _New Edition, entirely revised._

---- The Maid of Orleans. Translated by ANNA SWANWICK.

---- Mary Stuart. Translated by J. MELLISH.

---- Wallenstein's Camp and the Piccolomini. Translated by J. CHURCHILL
and S. T. COLERIDGE.

---- The Death of Wallenstein. Translated by S. T. COLERIDGE.

⁂ _For other Translations from Modern Languages, see the Catalogue of
Bohn's Libraries, which will be forwarded on application._


SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

_Detailed Catalogue sent on application_

+Elementary Botany.+ By PERCY GROOM, M.A., D.SC., F.L.S. With 275
Illustrations. 3_s._ 6_d._

+Elementary Botany.+ By G. F. ATKINSON, PH.B. 6_s._

+Botany for Schools and Colleges.+ By G. F. ATKINSON. Illustrated. 4_s._
6_d._ net.

+Practical Plant Physiology.+ By FREDERICK KEEBLE, M.A. Crown 8vo. 3_s._
6_d._

+A Laboratory Course in Plant Physiology.+ By W. F. GANONG, PH.D. 7_s._
6_d._ net.

+The Botanist's Pocket-Book.+ By W. R. HAYWARD. Revised by G. C. DRUCE.
4_s._ 6_d._

+An Introduction to the Study of the Comparative Anatomy of Animals.+ By
G. C. BOURNE, M.A., D.SC. With numerous Illustrations. 2 Vols.

    Vol. I. Animal Organization. The Protozoa and Cœlenterata.
    Revised Edition. 6_s._

    Vol. II. The Cœlomata. 6_s._

+A Manual of Zoology.+ By RICHARD HERTWIG. Translated by Prof. J. S.
KINGSLEY. Illustrated. 12_s._ 6_d._ net.

+Injurious and Useful Insects.+ An Introduction to the Study of Economic
Entomology. By Prof. L. C. MIALL, F.R.S. With 100 Illustrations. 3_s._
6_d._

+Civil Service Examination Papers: Chemistry Papers, Theoretical and
Practical.+ By A. P. NEWTON. 1_s._

+A First Year's Course of Chemistry.+ By JAMES SINCLAIR. 1_s._ 6_d._

+An Introduction to Chemistry.+ By D. S. MACNAIR, PH.D., B.SC. 2_s._

+Elementary Inorganic Chemistry.+ By Prof. JAMES WALKER, D.SC. 3_s._
6_d._

+Introduction to Inorganic Chemistry.+ By Dr. ALEXANDER SMITH, 7_s._
6_d._ net.

+Laboratory Outline of General Chemistry.+ By Dr. ALEXANDER SMITH. 2_s._
6_d._ net.

+General Chemistry for Colleges.+ By Dr. ALEXANDER SMITH. 6_s._ 6_d._
net.

+An Experimental Course in Physical Chemistry.+ By J. F. SPENCER, D.SC.,
PH.D. Crown 8vo. 2 vols. 3_s._ 6_d._ each.

+A Text-book of Organic Chemistry.+ By WM. A. NOYES. 6_s._ net.

+A Three Years' Course in Practical Physics.+ By JAMES SINCLAIR. 3 vols.
1_s._ 6_d._ each.

+A College Text-Book of Physics.+ By A. L. KIMBALL, PH.D. Illustrated.
10_s._ 6_d._ net.

+The Principles of Physics.+ By W. F. MAGIE. Illustrated. 7_s._ 6_d._
net.

+Practical Electricity and Magnetism.+ First Year's Course. By R. E.
STEEL. 2_s._

+A Text-Book of Gas Manufacture for Students.+ By JOHN HORNBY. Revised
and Enlarged. 7_s._ 6_d._ net.

+Turbines.+ By W. H. STUART GARNETT. 8vo. 5_s._ net.

+Electrons.+ By Sir OLIVER LODGE. 6_s._ net.

+Engines and Boilers.+ By W. MCQUADE. Crown 8vo. Numerous Illus. 3_s._
6_d._ net.

+Exercises in Metal Work.+ By A. T. J. KERSEY, A.R.C.SC. Crown 8vo.
1_s._ 6_d._ net.

+Practical Wood Carving for Technical Classes.+ By F. P. DRURY. 2_s._
6_d._


Technological Handbooks

Edited by Sir H. TRUEMAN WOOD

Specially adapted for candidates in the examinations of the City and
Guilds Institute. Illustrated.

+Woollen and Worsted Cloth Manufacture.+ By Prof. ROBERTS BEAUMONT.

                                          [_New Edition in preparation._

+Soap Manufacture.+ By W. LAWRENCE GADD, F.I.C., F.C.S. 5_s._

+Plumbing: Its Principles and Practice.+ By S. STEVENS HELLYER. 5_s._

+Silk-Dyeing and Finishing.+ By G. H. HURST, F.C.S. 7_s._ 6_d._

+Printing. A Practical Treatise.+ By C. T. JACOBI. 7_s._ 6_d._

+Cotton Spinning: Its Development, Principles, and Practice.+ By R.
MARSDEN. 6_s._ 6_d._

+Cotton Weaving: Its Development, Principles, and Practice.+ By R.
MARSDEN, 10_s._ 6_d._

+Coach Building.+ By JOHN PHILIPSON, M.INST.M.E. 6_s._

+Bookbinding.+ By J. W. ZAEHNSDORF. 5_s._

+The Principles of Wool Combing.+ By HOWARD PRIESTMAN. 6_s._


Music

+Music, A Complete Text-Book of.+ By Prof. H. C. BANISTER. New and
Cheaper Edition. 3_s._ 6_d._

+Music, A Concise History of.+ By Rev. H. G. BONAVIA HUNT, MUS. DOC. New
and Cheaper Edition. 2_s._ net.


HISTORY

_Catalogue of Historical Books sent post free on application_

+A Historical Course for Middle Forms.+ By B. L. K. HENDERSON, M.A. and
P. MEADOWS, M.A. 4 vols. 2_s._ each.

    Vol. I. Western Europe.--Vol. II. The English Nation: Social and
    Industrial History.--Vol. III. The English Nation: Constitutional
    History.--Vol. IV. The English Nation: Political and Military
    History.

+Lingard's History of England.+ Abridged and Continued by DOM H. N.
BIRT. With a Preface by ABBOT GASQUET, D.D. New Edition. With Maps.
3_s._ 6_d._; or in 2 vols. Vol. I. (to 1485), 2_s._ Vol. II.
(1485-1912), 2_s._

+An Introduction to English Industrial History.+ By HENRY ALLSOPP, B.A.
2_s._

+English History Source Books.+ Edited by S. E. WINBOLT, M.A., and
KENNETH BELL, M.A. 1_s._ net each.

    449-1066. The Welding of the Race. Edited by Rev. JOHN WALLIS, M.A.

    1066-1154. The Normans in England. Edited by A. E. BLAND, M.A.

    1154-1216. The Angevins and the Charter. Edited by S. M. TOYNE, M.A.

    1216-1307. The Growth of Parliament. Edited by W. D. ROBIESON.

    1307-1399. War and Misrule. Edited by A. A. LOCKE.

    1399-1485. York and Lancaster. Edited by W. GARMON JONES, M.A.

    1485-1547. The Reformation and the Renaissance. Edited by F. W.
    BEWSHER.

    1547-1603. The Age of Elizabeth. Edited by ARUNDELL ESDAILE, M.A.

    1603-1660. Puritanism and Liberty. Edited by KENNETH BELL, M.A.

    1660-1714. A Constitution in Making. Edited by G. B. PERRETT, M.A.

    1714-1760. Walpole and Chatham. Edited by K. A. ESDAILE.

    1760-1801. American Independence and the French Revolution. Edited
    by S. E. WINBOLT, M.A.

    1801-1815. England and Napoleon. Edited by S. E. WINBOLT, M.A.

    1815-1837. Peace and Reform. Edited by A. C. W. EDWARDS.

    1837-1856. Commercial Politics. Edited by R. H. GRETTON.

    1856-1876. From Palmerston to Disraeli. Edited by EWING HARDING,
    B.A.

    1876-1887. Imperialism and Mr. Gladstone. By R. H. GRETTON, M.A.

       *       *       *       *       *

1535-1913. Canada. By JAMES MUNRO.

       *       *       *       *       *

+A Source Book of London History.+ By P. MEADOWS, M.A. 1_s._ 6_d._ net.

+Bell's Scottish History Source Books.+

    1689-1746. The Jacobite Rebellions. By J. PRINGLE THOMSON.

    1637-1688. The Scottish Covenanters. By J. PRINGLE THOMSON.

⁂ These volumes will be followed by others dealing with Scottish
History.

+Mediæval England: 1066-1485.+ A Framework of History. By S. M. TOYNE,
M.A. Crown 8vo. 1_s._ net.

+First Lessons in English History.+ Illustrated. 1_s._

+A Junior History of England.+ By E. NIXON. Illustrated. 1_s._ 6_d._

+The Building of the British Empire.+ By E. M. RICHARDSON, B.A. 1_s._
6_d._

+The British Empire Beyond the Seas.+ By M. T. NEWBIGIN. 3_s._ 6_d._

+A Senior History of England.+ By A. MCKILLIAM, M.A. Crown 8vo. Illus.
2_s._

+Highways of the World.+ By A. E. MCKILLIAM, M.A. With Maps and
Illustrations. 1_s._ 6_d._

+A Social History of England.+ By GEORGE GUEST. Illustrated. 1_s._ 6_d._

+A Constitutional History of England.+ By GEORGE GUEST. Illustrated.
1_s._ 6_d._

+Early English History from the Chronicles.+ By A. F. DODD, B.A. 2_s._

+British Church History to A.D. 1000.+ By W. H. FLECKER, M.A., D.C.L.
1_s._ 6_d._

+Civil Service Examination Papers: History Questions.+ By A. PERCIVAL
NEWTON, M.A. 1_s._

+Ancient History for Schools.+ By E. NIXON and H. R. STEEL. 2_s._

+Strickland's Lives of the Queens of England.+ 6 vols. 5_s._ each.

⁂ Abridged edition for Schools, 6_s._ 6_d._

+Landmarks in the History of Europe.+ By E. M. RICHARDSON, B.A. Crown
8vo. 2_s._

+The Government of Man.+ By G. S. BRETT, M.A. 3_s._ 6_d._ net.

+The King's Government.+ By R. H. GRETTON. 2_s._ net.

+An Atlas of European History.+ By EARLE W. DOW. 6_s._ net.

+The Foundations of Modern Europe.+ By Dr. EMIL REICH. 5_s._ net.

+Dyer's History of Modern Europe.+ Revised throughout by ARTHUR HASSALL,
M.A. 6 vols. With Maps. 3_s._ 6_d._ each.

+Life of Napoleon I.+ By JOHN HOLLAND ROSE, LITT.D. 1 vol. 6_s._ net.

+Carlyle's French Revolution.+ Edited by J. HOLLAND ROSE, LITT.D. 3
vols. 1_s._ net each.

+Mignet's History of the French Revolution,+ from 1789 to 1814. 1_s._
net.

+Select Historical Documents of the Middle Ages.+ Translated and edited
by ERNEST F. HENDERSON, PH.D. 5_s._

+Menzel's History of Germany.+ 3 vols. 3_s._ 6_d._ each.

+Ranke's History of the Popes.+ Translated by E. FOSTER. New Edition.
Revised. 3 vols. 1_s._ net each.




                  _An Encyclopedia in a Single Volume._

                 WEBSTER'S NEW INTERNATIONAL DICTIONARY

                2700 Quarto Pages     6000 Illustrations

                                 OVER

                   442,000 DEFINED WORDS AND PHRASES

                          DIVIDED AS FOLLOWS:

        400,000 Main Vocabulary Definitions
         30,000 Geographical and 12,000 Biographical Entries.

 +SPECIAL FEATURES.+--Scholarly but Lucid Definitions--Complete History
    of the English Language--A Comprehensive Treatise on Orthography--An
    Exhaustive Guide to Pronunciation--Complete Pictorial Dictionary.

                   *       *       *       *       *

 +The India Paper Edition.+--It is less than one-half the weight and
    thickness of the library edition. The paper used is of the finest
    quality, being thin, strong, and opaque. It has an excellent
    printing surface, resulting in remarkably clear impressions of type
    and illustrations.

                     COMPARATIVE WEIGHTS AND SIZES.

        +Library Edition.+                +India Paper Edition.+
        Weight--15-3/4 lbs.                 Weight--6-3/4 lbs.
   Size--12-3/8 × 9-3/4 × 5 ins.     Size--12-1/4 × 9-1/2 × 2-1/4 ins.

                   *       *       *       *       *

                         _ABRIDGED PRICE LIST:_

    +Library Edition.+--Cloth, £2 net. Cloth (2 vols.), £2 2_s._ 6_d._
  net. Full Sheepskin, £2 10_s._ net. Also in many other Bindings.

    +India Paper Edition.+--Buckram, £3 3_s._ net. Full Seal extra, £4
  4_s._ net.

                   *       *       *       *       *

       _DEFERRED PAYMENTS can be arranged for any style of Binding.
           Write for a Detailed Prospectus, Specimen Pages, and
                               Order Form._

                   *       *       *       *       *

           G. BELL AND SONS, LTD., PORTUGAL STREET, LONDON, W.C.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Jacobite Rebellions (1689-1746), by 
James Pringle Thomson

